                                                       A Neural Tangent Kernel Perspective of
                                                              Infinite Tree Ensembles

                                                                      Ryuichi Kanoh1,2 , Mahito Sugiyama1,2
                                                                           1
                                                                             National Institute of Informatics
                                                             2
                                                               The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI
                                                                           {kanoh, mahito}@nii.ac.jp
arXiv:2109.04983v2 [cs.LG] 21 Mar 2022




                                                                                        Abstract
                                                  In practical situations, the tree ensemble is one of the most popular models along
                                                  with neural networks. A soft tree is a variant of a decision tree. Instead of using a
                                                  greedy method for searching splitting rules, the soft tree is trained using a gradient
                                                  method in which the entire splitting operation is formulated in a differentiable form.
                                                  Although ensembles of such soft trees have been used increasingly in recent years,
                                                  little theoretical work has been done to understand their behavior. By considering
                                                  an ensemble of infinite soft trees, this paper introduces and studies the Tree Neural
                                                  Tangent Kernel (TNTK), which provides new insights into the behavior of the
                                                  infinite ensemble of soft trees. Using the TNTK, we theoretically identify several
                                                  non-trivial properties, such as global convergence of the training, the equivalence
                                                  of the oblivious tree structure, and the degeneracy of the TNTK induced by the
                                                  deepening of the trees.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Tree ensembles and neural networks are powerful machine learning models that are used in various
                                         real-world applications. A soft tree ensemble is one variant of tree ensemble models that inherits
                                         characteristics of neural networks. Instead of using a greedy method (Quinlan, 1986; Breiman et al.,
                                         1984) to search splitting rules, the soft tree makes the splitting rules soft and updates the entire model’s
                                         parameters simultaneously using the gradient method. Soft tree ensemble models are known to have
                                         high empirical performance (Kontschieder et al., 2015; Popov et al., 2020; Hazimeh et al., 2020),
                                         especially for tabular datasets. Apart from accuracy, there are many reasons why one should formulate
                                         trees in a soft manner. For example, unlike hard decision trees, soft tree models can be updated
                                         sequentially (Ke et al., 2019) and trained in combination with pre-training (Arik & Pfister, 2019),
                                         resulting in characteristics that are favorable in terms of real-world continuous service deployment.
                                         Their model interpretability, induced by the hierarchical splitting structure, has also attracted much
                                         attention (Frosst & Hinton, 2017; Wan et al., 2021; Tanno et al., 2019). In addition, the idea of the
                                         soft tree is implicitly used in many different places; for example, the process of allocating data to the
                                         appropriate leaves can be interpreted as a special case of Mixture-of-Experts (Jordan & Jacobs, 1993;
                                         Shazeer et al., 2017; Lepikhin et al., 2021), a technique for balancing computational complexity and
                                         prediction performance.
                                         Although various techniques have been proposed to train trees, the theoretical validity of such
                                         techniques is not well understood at sufficient depth. Examples of the practical technique include
                                         constraints on individual trees using parameter sharing (Popov et al., 2020), adjusting the hardness
                                         of the splitting operation (Frosst & Hinton, 2017; Hazimeh et al., 2020), and the use of overparame-
                                         terization (Belkin et al., 2019; Karthikeyan et al., 2021). To better understand the training of tree
                                         ensemble models, we focus on the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) (Jacot et al., 2018), a powerful tool
                                         that has been successfully applied to various neural network models with infinite hidden layer nodes.
                                         Every model architecture is known to produce a distinct NTK. Not only for the multi-layer perceptron
                                         (MLP), many studies have been conducted across various models, such as for Convolutional Neural

                                                                                              1
Networks (CNTK) (Arora et al., 2019; Li et al., 2019), Graph Neural Networks (GNTK) (Du et al.,
2019b), and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNTK) (Alemohammad et al., 2021). Although a number
of findings have been obtained using the NTK, they are mainly for typical neural networks, and it is
still not clear how to apply the NTK theory to the tree models.
In this paper, by considering the limit of infinitely many trees, we introduce and study the neural
tangent kernel for tree ensembles, called the Tree Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK), which provides
new insights into the behavior of the ensemble of soft trees. The goal of this research is to derive
the kernel that characterizes the training behavior of soft tree ensembles, and to obtain theoretical
support for the empirical techniques. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• First extension of the NTK concept to the tree ensemble models. We derive the analytical form
  for the TNTK at initialization induced by infinitely many perfect binary trees with arbitrary depth
  (Section 4.1.1). We also prove that the TNTK remains constant during the training of infinite soft
  trees, which allows us to analyze the behavior by kernel regression and discuss global convergence
  of training using the positive definiteness of the TNTK (Section 4.1.2, 4.1.3).
• Equivalence of the oblivious tree ensemble models. We show the TNTK induced by the oblivious
  tree structure used in practical open-source libraries such as CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018)
  and NODE (Popov et al., 2020) converges to the same TNTK induced by a non-oblivious one in
  the limit of infinite trees. This observation implicitly supports the good empirical performance of
  oblivious trees with parameter sharing between tree nodes (Section 4.2.1).
• Nonlinearity by adjusting the tree splitting operation. Practically, various functions have been
  proposed to represent the tree splitting operation. The most basic function is sigmoid. We show
  that the TNTK is almost a linear kernel in the basic case, and when we adjust the splitting function
  hard, the TNTK becomes nonlinear (Section 4.2.2).
• Degeneracy of the TNTK with deep trees. The TNTK associated with deep trees exhibits
  degeneracy: the TNTK values are almost identical for deep trees even if the inner products of
  inputs are different. As a result, poor performance in numerical experiments is observed with the
  TNTK induced by infinitely many deep trees. This result supports the fact that the depth of trees is
  usually not so large in practical situations (Section 4.2.3).
• Comparison to the NTK induced by the MLP. We investigate the generalization performance of
  infinite tree ensembles by kernel regression with the TNTK on 90 real-world datasets. Although
  the MLP with infinite width has better prediction accuracy on average, the infinite tree ensemble
  performs better than the infinite width MLP in more than 30 percent of the datasets. We also
  showed that the TNTK is superior to the MLP-induced NTK in computational speed (Section 5).

2     Background and related work
Our main focus in this paper is the soft tree and the neural tangent kernel. We briefly introduce and
review them.

2.1   Soft tree

Based on Kontschieder et al. (2015), we formulate a regression by soft trees. Figure 1 is a schematic
image of an ensemble of M soft trees. We define a data matrix x ∈ RF ×N for N training samples
{x1 , . . . , xN } with F features and define tree-wise parameter matrices for internal nodes wm ∈
RF ×N and leaf nodes πm ∈ R1×L for each tree m ∈ [M ] = {1, . . . , M } as
                | ...     |                      |    ...    |
                              !                                   !
  x=           x1 . . . xN      , wm =        wm,1 . . . wm,N       , πm = (πm,1 , . . . , πm,L ) ,
                | ...     |                      |    ...    |
where internal nodes (blue nodes in Figure 1) and leaf nodes (green nodes in Figure 1) are indexed
from 1 to N and 1 to L, respectively. N and L may change across trees in general, while we assume
that they are always fixed for simplicity throughout the paper. We also write horizontal concatenation
of (column) vectors as x = (x1 , . . . , xN ) ∈ RF ×N and wm = (wm,1 , . . . , wm,N ) ∈ RF ×N .
Unlike hard decision trees, we consider a model in which every single leaf node ` ∈ [L] = {1, . . . , L}
of a tree m holds the probability that data will reach to it. Therefore, the splitting operation at an
intermediate node n ∈ [N ] = {1, . . . , N } does not definitively decide splitting to the left or right.


                                                   2
Figure 1: Schematics of an ensemble of M soft trees. Tree internal nodes are indexed according to
the breadth-first ordering.


To provide an explicit form of the probabilistic tree splitting operation, we introduce the following
binary relations that depend on the tree’s structure: ` . n (resp. n & `), which is true if a leaf
` belongs to the left (resp. right) subtree of a node n and false otherwise. We can now exploit
µm,` (xi , wm ) : RF × RF ×N → [0, 1], a function that returns the probability that a sample xi will
reach a leaf ` of the tree m, as follows:
                                  N
                                  Y                                                   1
              µm,` (xi , wm ) =         gm,n (xi , wm,n )1`.n (1 − gm,n (xi , wm,n )) n&` ,             (1)
                                  n=1

where 1Q is an indicator function conditioned on the argument Q, i.e., 1true = 1 and 1false = 0, and
gm,n : RF × RF → [0, 1] is a decision function at each internal node n of a tree m. To approximate
decision tree splitting, the output of the decision function gm,n should be between 0.0 and 1.0. If
the output of a decision function takes only 0.0 or 1.0, the splitting operation is equivalent to hard
splitting used in typical decision trees. We will define an explicit form of the decision function gm,n
in Equation (5) in the next section.
The prediction for each xi from a tree m with nodes parameterized by wm and πm is given by
                                                    L
                                                    X
                             fm (xi , wm , πm ) =         πm,` µm,` (xi , wm ),                         (2)
                                                    `=1

where fm : RF × RF ×N × R1×L → R, and πm,` denotes the response of a leaf ` of the tree m.
This formulation means that the prediction output is the average of the leaf values πm,` weighted by
µm,` (xi , wm ), probability of assigning the sample xi to the leaf `. If µm,` (xi , wm ) takes only 1.0
for one leaf and 0.0 for the other leaves, the behavior is equivalent to a typical decision tree prediction.
In this model, wm and πm are updated during training with a gradient method.
While many empirical successes have been reported, theoretical analysis for soft tree ensemble
models has not been sufficiently developed.

2.2   Neural tangent kernel

Given N samples x ∈ RF ×N , the NTK induced by any model architecture at a training time τ is
formulated as a matrix Hc∗ ∈ RN ×N , in which each (i, j) ∈ [N ] × [N ] component is defined as
                         τ
                                                                                          
                  ∗          ∗               ∂farbitrary (xi , θτ ) ∂farbitrary (xj , θτ )
               [Hτ ]ij := Θτ (xi , xj ) :=
                c          b                                       ,                         ,  (3)
                                                     ∂θτ                    ∂θτ
where h·, ·i denotes the inner product and θτ ∈ RP is a concatenated vector of all the P trainable
model parameters at τ . An asterisk “ ∗ ” indicates that the model is arbitrary. The model func-
tion farbitrary : RF × RP → R used in Equation (3) is expected to be applicable to a variety of
model structures.   For the soft tree ensembles introduced in Section 2.1, the NTK is formulated as
PM PN D ∂f (xi ,w,π) ∂f (xj ,w,π) E PM PL D ∂f (xi ,w,π) ∂f (xj ,w,π) E
   m=1      n=1     ∂wm,n ,     ∂wm,n      + m=1 `=1           ∂πm,`   , ∂πm,`      .


                                                     3
Within the limit of infinite width with a proper parameter scaling, a variety of properties have
been discovered from the NTK induced by the MLP. For example, Jacot et al. (2018) showed the
convergence of Θ b MLP (xi , xj ), which can vary with respect to parameters, to the unique limiting
                   0
         MLP
kernel Θ     (xi , xj ) at initialization in probability. Moreover, they also showed that the limiting
kernel does not change during training in probability:

                  lim     b MLP
                          Θ τ   (xi , xj ) =    lim       b MLP
                                                          Θ 0   (xi , xj ) = ΘMLP (xi , xj ).        (4)
                width→∞                        width→∞

This property helps in the analytical understanding of the model behavior. For example, with the
squared loss and infinitesimal step size with learning rate η, the training dynamics of gradient flow in
function space coincides with kernel ridge-less regression with the limiting NTK. Such a property
gives us a data-dependent generalization bound (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2003) related to the NTK
and the prediction targets. In addition, if the NTK is positive definite, the training can achieve global
convergence (Du et al., 2019a; Jacot et al., 2018).
Although a number of findings have been obtained using the NTK, they are mainly for typical neural
networks such as MLP and ResNet (He et al., 2016), and the NTK theory has not yet been applied
to tree models. The NTK theory is often used in the context of overparameterization, which is a
subject of interest not only for the neural networks, but also for the tree models (Belkin et al., 2019;
Karthikeyan et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2018).


3   Setup

We train model parameters w and π to minimize the squared
loss using the gradient method, where w = (w1 , . . . , wM )      1.0
and π = (π1 , . . . , πM ). The tree structure is fixed during                                       11
                                                                  0.8
training. In order to use a known closed-form solution of the                                        9
NTK (Williams, 1996; Lee et al., 2019), we use a scaled error
                                                                      (wm, n xi )



                                                                  0.6                                7
function σ : R → (0, 1), resulting in the following decision      0.4                                5
function:
                                                                  0.2                                3
                                    >
                                         
         gm,n (xi , wm,n ) = σ wm,n xi                            0.0                                1
                                                                          2       0        2
                                1        >
                                                    1                          wm, n xi
                            := erf αwm,n     xi + ,        (5)
                                2                    2
                       Rp                                      Figure 2: The scaled error function. We
                              2
where erf(p) = √2π 0 e−t dt for p ∈ R. This scaled error draw 50 lines with varying α by 0.25.
function approximates a commonly used sigmoid function. A dotted magenta line shows a sigmoid
Since the bias term for the input of σ can be expressed inside function, which is close to a scaled error
of w by adding an element that takes a fixed constant value function with α ∼ 0.5.
for all input of the soft trees x, we do not consider the bias
for simplicity. The scaling factor α is introduced by Frosst
& Hinton (2017) to avoid overly soft splitting. Figure 2 shows that the decision function becomes
harder as α increases (from blue to red), and in the limit α → ∞ it coincides with the hard splitting
used in typical decision trees.
When aggregating the output of multiple trees, we divide the sum of the tree outputs by the square
root of the number of trees
                                                         M
                                              1 X
                             f (xi , w, π) = √       fm (xi , wm , πm ).                             (6)
                                               M m=1
         √
This 1/ M scaling is known to be essential in the existing NTK literature to use the weak law of the
large numbers (Jacot et al., 2018). On top of Equation (6), we initialize each of model parameters
wm,n and πm,` with zero-mean i.i.d. Gaussians with unit variances. We refer such a parameterization
as NTK initialization. In this paper, we consider a model such that all M trees have the same perfect
binary tree structure, a common setting for soft tree ensembles (Popov et al., 2020; Kontschieder
et al., 2015; Hazimeh et al., 2020).


                                                      4
                                                  d = 3, = 2.0                                      Change with fixed d = 3                            Change d with fixed = 2.0
                           2.5                                                             100
                                       M = 16
                                       M = 64
                           2.0         M = 256                                                                                                  10 1
                                       M = 1024
                                       M = 4096                                                 1
                           1.5         M=                                                  10
                                                                                                    trend: M 1/2




            0 (xi , xj )




                                                                             ||H0 H||F




                                                                                                                                  ||H0 H||F
                                                                                                    d = 3, = 0.5




                                                                                ||H0 ||F




                                                                                                                                     ||H0 ||F
                           1.0                                                                      d = 3, = 1.0                                           trend: M 1/2
                                                                                                    d = 3, = 2.0                                10 2       d = 1, = 2.0
                                                                                           10 2     d = 3, = 4.0                                           d = 2, = 2.0
                           0.5                                                                      d = 3, = 8.0                                           d = 3, = 2.0
                                                                                                    d = 3, = 16.0                                          d = 4, = 2.0
                                                                                                    d = 3, = 32.0                                          d = 5, = 2.0
                           0.0                                                                      d = 3, = 64.0                                          d = 6, = 2.0

                                 1.0       0.5      0.0         0.5    1.0                             102              103                                   102             103
                                         Inner product of the inputs                                                M                                                     M


Figure 3: Left: An empirical demonstration of convergence of Θ  b 0 (xi , xj ) to the fixed limit Θ(xi , xj )
as M increases. Two simple inputs are considered: xi = {1, 0} and xj = {cos(β), sin(β)}
with β = [0, π]. The TNTK Θ      b (3) (xi , xj ) with α = 2.0 is calculated 10 times with parameter
                                   0
re-initialization for each of the M = 16, 64, 256, 1024, and 4096. Center and Right: Parameter
dependency of the convergence. The vertical axis corresponds to the averaged error between the
c0 and the H := limM →∞ H
H                              c0 for 50 random unit vectors of length F = 5. The dashed lines are
plotted only for showing the slope. The error bars show the standard deviations of 10 executions.


4     Theoretical results
4.1     Basic properties of the TNTK

The NTK in Equation (3) induced by the soft tree ensembles is referred to here as the TNTK and
denoted by Θ  b (d) (xi , xj ) the TNTK at initialization induced by the ensemble of trees with depth d.
                0
In this section, we show the properties of the TNTK that are important for understanding the training
behavior of the soft tree ensembles.

4.1.1    TNTK for infinite tree ensembles
First, we show the formula of the TNTK at initialization, which converges when considering the limit
of infinite trees (M → ∞).
Theorem 1. Let u ∈ RF be any column vector sampled from zero-mean i.i.d. Gaussians with unit
variance. The TNTK for an ensemble of soft perfect binary trees with tree depth d converges in
probability to the following deterministic kernel as M → ∞,
                                     b (d) (xi , xj )
              Θ(d) (xi , xj ) := lim Θ 0
                                                            M →∞

                                                       = 2d d Σ(xi , xj )(T (xi , xj ))d−1 Ṫ (xi , xj ) + (2T (xi , xj ))d ,                                                       (7)
                                                         |                   {z                       }    |     {z       }
                                                                                 contribution from inner nodes                                         contribution from leaves

where Σ(xi , xj ) :=                                      x>
                                    T (xi , xj ) := E[σ(u xi )σ(u xj )], and Ṫ (xi , xj ) :=
                                                           i xj ,
                                                                                                                              >                        >

E[σ̇(u> xi )σ̇(u> xj )]. Moreover, T (xi , xj ) and Ṫ (xi , xj ) are analytically obtained in the closed-
form as
                                                                                      !
                          1                            α2 Σ(xi , xj )                     1
          T (xi , xj ) =    arcsin p                                                    + ,            (8)
                         2π                2                       2
                                       (α Σ(xi , xi ) + 0.5)(α Σ(xj , xj ) + 0.5)         4
                                                      α2                              1
            Ṫ (xi , xj ) =                              p                                                             .                                                            (9)
                                                      π    (1 + 2α Σ(xi , xi )) (1 + 2α2 Σ(xj , xj ))−4α4 Σ(xi , xj )2
                                                                  2

                                                              >   2 √
The dot used in σ̇(u> xi ) means the first derivative: αe−(αu xi ) / π, and E[·] means the expecta-
tion. The scalar π in Equation (8) and Equation (9) is the circular constant, and u corresponds to
wm,n at an arbitrary internal node. The proof is given by induction. We can derive the formula of the
limiting TNTK by treating the number of trees in a tree ensemble like the width of the hidden layer
in MLP, although the MLP and the soft tree ensemble are apparently different models. Due to space
limitations, detailed proofs are given in the supplementary material.
We demonstrate convergence of the TNTK in Figure 3. We empirically observe that the TNTK
induced by sufficiently many soft trees converges to the limiting TNTK given in Equation (7). The


                                                                                                               5
kernel values induced by an finite ensemble are already close to the limiting TNTK if the number
of trees is larger than several hundreds, which is a typical order of the number of trees in practical
applications1 . Therefore, it is reasonable to analyze soft tree ensembles via the TNTK.
By comparing Equation (7) and the limiting NTK induced by a two-layer perceptron (shown in the
supplementary material), we can immediately derive the following when the tree depth is 1.
Corollary 1. If the splitting function at the tree internal node is the same as the activation function
of the neural network, the limiting TNTK obtained from a soft tree ensemble of depth 1 is equivalent
to the limiting NTK generated by a two-layer perceptron up to constant multiple.

For any tree depth larger than 1, the limiting NTK induced by the MLP with any number of layers
(Arora et al., 2019, shown in the supplementary material) and the limiting TNTK do not match. This
implies that the hierarchical splitting structure is a distinctive feature of soft tree ensembles.

4.1.2     Positive definiteness of the limiting TNTK
Since the loss surface of a large model is expected to be highly non-convex, understanding the good
empirical trainability of overparameterized models remains an open problem (Dauphin et al., 2014).
The positive definiteness of the limiting kernel is one of the most important conditions for achieving
global convergence (Du et al., 2019a; Jacot et al., 2018). Jacot et al. (2018) showed that the conditions
kxi k2 = 1 for all i ∈ [N ] and xi 6= xj (i 6= j) are necessary for the positive definiteness of the
NTK induced by the MLP for an input set. As for the TNTK, since the formulation (Equation (7))
is different from that of typical neural networks such as an MLP, it is not clear whether or not the
limiting TNTK is positive definite.
We prove that the TNTK induced by infinite trees is also positive definite under the same condition
for the MLP.
Proposition 1. For infinitely many soft trees with any depth and the NTK initialization, the limiting
TNTK is positive definite if kxi k2 = 1 for all i ∈ [N ] and xi 6= xj (i 6= j).

The proof is provided in the supplementary material. Similar to the discussion for the MLP (Du et al.,
2019a; Jacot et al., 2018), if the limiting TNTK is constant during training, the positive definiteness of
the limiting TNTK at initialization indicates that training of the infinite trees with a gradient method
can converge to the global minimum. The constantness of the limiting TNTK during training is
shown in the following section.

4.1.3     Change of the TNTK during training
We prove that the TNTK hardly changes from its initial value during training when considering an
ensemble of infinite trees with finite α (used in Equation (5)).
Theorem 2. Let λmin and λmax be the minimum and maximum eigenvalues of the limiting TNTK.
Assume that the limiting TNTK is positive definite for input sets. For soft tree ensemble models
with the NTK initialization and a positive finite scaling factor α trained under gradient flow with a
learning rate η < 2/(λmin + λmax ), we have, with high probability,
                                                                          
                                (d)               (d)                   1
                         sup Θτ (xi , xj ) − Θ0 (xi , xj ) = O √
                              b                 b                            .                   (10)
                                                                        M

The complete proof is provided in the supplementary material. Figure 4 shows that the training
trajectory analytically obtained (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019) from the limiting TNTK and
the trajectory during gradient descent training become similar as the number of trees increases,
demonstrating the validity of using the TNTK framework to analyze the training behavior.
Remarks. In the limit of infinitely large α, which corresponds to a hard decision tree splitting
(Figure 2), it should be noted that this theorem does not hold because of the lack of local Lipschitzness
(Lee et al., 2019), which is the fundamental property for this proof. Therefore the change in the
TNTK during training is no longer necessarily asymptotic to zero, even if the number of trees is
infinite. This means that understanding the hard decision tree’s behavior using the TNTK is not
straightforward.
   1
       For example, Popov et al. (2020) uses 2048 trees.


                                                           6
                                                        Train output                                                          Test output
                                 1.5
                                                                                                         1
                                 1.0
                                 0.5                                                                     0
                                 0.0




                   f(xi , w, )




                                                                                           f(xi , w, )
                                 0.5                                                                     1
                                 1.0
                                 1.5                                                                     2
                                           Analytical                                                            Analytical
                                 2.0       M = 16                                                                M = 16
                                           M = 1024                                                      3       M = 1024
                                 2.5
                                       0      200       400         600   800   1000                         0      200       400         600   800   1000
                                                           (iteration)                                                           (iteration)


Figure 4: Output dynamics for train and test data points. The color of each line corresponds to each
data point. Soft tree ensembles with d = 3, α = 2.0 are trained by a full-batch gradient descent
with a learning rate of 0.1. Initial outputs are shifted to zero (Chizat et al., 2019). There are 10
randomly generated training points and 10 randomly generated test data points, and their dimension
                                                                                     0
F = 5. The prediction targets are also randomly generated. Let H(x, x0 ) ∈ RN ×N be the limiting
NTK matrix for two input matrices and I be an identity matrix. For analytical results, we draw the
trajectory f (v, θτ ) = H(v, x)H(x, x)−1 (I − exp[−ηH(x, x)τ ])y (Lee et al., 2019) using the
limiting TNTK (Equation (7)), where v ∈ RF is an arbitrary input and x ∈ RF ×N and y ∈ RN are
the training dataset and the targets, respectively.




Figure 5: Left: Normal Tree, Right: Oblivious Tree. The rules for splitting in the same depth are
shared across the same depth in the oblivious tree, while πm,` on leaves can be different.


4.2     Implications for practical techniques

In this section, from the viewpoint of the TNTK, we discuss the training techniques that have been
used in practice.

4.2.1    Influence of the oblivious tree structure
An oblivious tree is a practical tree model architecture where the rules across decision tree splitting
are shared across the same depth as illustrated in Figure 5. Since the number of the splitting decision
calculation can be reduced from O(2d ) to O(d), the oblivious tree structure is used in various
open-source libraries such as CatBoost (Prokhorenkova et al., 2018) and NODE (Popov et al., 2020).
However, the reason for the good empirical performance of oblivious trees is non-trivial despite
weakening the expressive power due to parameter sharing.
We find that the oblivious tree structure does not change the limiting TNTK from the non-oblivious
one. This happens because, even with parameter sharing at splitting nodes, leaf parameters π are not
shared, resulting in independence between outputs of left and right subtrees.
Theorem 3. The TNTK with the perfect binary tree ensemble and the TNTK of its corresponding
oblivious tree ensemble obtained via parameter sharing converge to the same kernel in probability in
the limit of infinite trees (M → ∞).

The complete proof is in the supplementary material. Note that leaf values π do not have to be the
same for oblivious and non-oblivious trees. This theorem supports the recent success of tree ensemble
models with the oblivious tree structures.

4.2.2    Effect of the decision function modification
Practically, based on the commonly used sigmoid function, a variety of functions have been pro-
posed for the splitting operation. By considering a large scaling factor α in Equation (5), we
can envisage situations in which there are practically used hard functions, such as two-class


                                                                                       7
                              (xi , xj )                                (xi , xj )                        Normalized     (2) (x , x )
                                                                                                                              i   j              Normalized      (d) (x , x ),
                                                                                                                                                                       i   j     =1
           0.5                                       2.0
                                                                                               1.00                                       1.00
           0.4                                       1.5                                       0.75                                       0.75
           0.3
                                                     1.0                                       0.50                                       0.50
           0.2
                                                     0.5                                       0.25                                       0.25
           0.1
                                                     0.0                                       0.00                                       0.00
           0.0
                 1               0               1         1               0               1          1               0               1          1               0               1
                     inner product of the inputs               inner product of the inputs                inner product of the inputs                Inner product of the inputs

                          1                 3                  5                     7                9                11                             5    10 15 20 25
                                                                                                                                                                 d


Figure 6: Parameter dependencies of T (xi , xj ), Ṫ (xi , xj ), and Θ(d) (xi , xj ). The vertical axes are
normalized so that the value is 1 when the inner product of the inputs is 1. The input vector size is
normalized to be one. For the three figures on the left, the line color is determined by α, and for the
figure on the right, it is determined by the depth of the tree.


sparsemax, σ(x) = sparsemax([x, 0]) (Martins & Astudillo, 2016), and two-class entmax,
σ(x) = entmax([x, 0]) (Peters et al., 2019). Figure 6 shows α dependencies of TNTK param-
eters. Equation (7) means that the TNTK is formulated by multiplying T (xi , xj ) and Ṫ (xi , xj ) to
the linear kernel Σ(xi , xj ). On the one hand, T (xi , xj ) and Ṫ (xi , xj ) with small α are almost con-
stant, even for different input inner products, resulting in the almost linear TNTK. On the other hand,
the nonlinearity increases as α increases. For Figure 2, the original sigmoid function corresponds to
a scaled error function for α ∼ 0.5, which induces almost the linear kernel. Although a closed-form
TNTK using sigmoid as a decision function has not been obtained, its kernel is expected to be almost
linear. Therefore, from the viewpoint of the TNTK, an adjustment of the decision function (Frosst
& Hinton, 2017; Popov et al., 2020; Hazimeh et al., 2020) can be interpreted as an escape from the
linear kernel behavior.

4.2.3   Degeneracy caused by deep trees

As the depth increases, T (xi , xj ) defined in Equation (8), which consists of the arcsine function,
is multiplied multiple times to calculate the limiting TNTK in Equation (7). Therefore, when we
increase the depth too much, the resulting TNTK exhibits degeneracy: its output values are almost
the same as each other’s, even though the input’s inner products are different. The rightmost panel
of Figure 6 shows such degeneracy behavior. In terms of kernel regression, models using a kernel
that gives almost the same inner product to all data except those that are quite close to each other
are expected to have poor generalization performance. Such behavior is observed in our numerical
experiments (Section 5). In practical applications, overly deep soft or hard decision trees are not
usually used because overly deep trees show poor performance (Luo et al., 2021), which is supported
by the degeneracy of the TNTK.


5   Numerical experiments

Setup. We present our experimental results on 90 classification tasks in the UCI database (Dua
& Graff, 2017), with fewer than 5000 data points, as in Arora et al. (2020). We performed kernel
regression using the limiting TNTK defined in Equation (7) with varying the tree depth (d) and the
scaling (α) of the decision function. The limiting TNTK does not change during training for an
infinite ensemble of soft trees (Theorem 2); therefore, predictions from that model are equivalent to
kernel regression using the limiting TNTK (Jacot et al., 2018). To consider the ridge-less situation,
regularization strength is set to be 1.0 × 10−8 , a very small constant. By way of comparison,
performances of the kernel regression with the MLP-induced NTK (Jacot et al., 2018) and the RBF
kernel are also reported. For the MLP-induced NTK, we use ReLU for the activation function. We
follow the procedures of Arora et al. (2020) and Fernández-Delgado et al. (2014): We report 4-fold
cross-validation performance with random data splitting. To tune parameters, all available training
samples are randomly split into one training and one validation set, while imposing that each class
has the same number of training and validation samples. Then the parameter with the best validation
accuracy is selected. Other details are provided in the supplementary material.


                                                                                               8
                                                         MLP-induced NTK
                                                         TNTK




Figure 7: Left: Averaged accuracy over 90 datasets. The performances of the kernel regression with
the MLP-induced NTK and the RBF kernel are shown for comparison. Since the depth is not a hyper-
parameter of the RBF kernel, performance is shown by a horizontal line. The statistical significance is
also assessed in the supplementary material. Right: Running time for kernel computation. The input
dataset has 300 samples with 10 features. Feature values are generated by zero-mean i.i.d Gaussian
with unit variance. The error bars show the standard deviations of 10 executions.


Table 1: Performance win rate against the MLP-induced NTK. We tune the depth from d = 1 to 29
for the dataset-wise comparison for both the TNTK and the MLP-induced NTK. For the RBF kernel,
30 different hyperparameters are tried. Detailed results are in the supplementary material.

                                                   TNTK                                         RBF
               α          0.5     1.0     2.0    4.0  8.0                  16.0   32.0   64.0    —
         Win rate (%)     13.6   18.8    22.2    28.6   32.5               31.6   34.9   27.2   11.8


Comparison to the MLP. The left panel of Figure 7 shows the averaged performance as a function
of the depth. Although the TNTK with properly tuned parameters tend to be better than those obtained
with the RBF kernel, they are often inferior to the MLP-induced NTK. The results support the good
performance of the MLP-induced NTK (Arora et al., 2020). However, it should be noted that when
we look at each dataset one by one, the TNTK is superior to the MLP-induced NTK by more than
30 percent of the dataset, as shown in Table 1. This is a case where the characteristics of data and
the inductive bias of the model fit well together. In addition, although the computational cost of
the MLP-induced NTK is linear with respect to the depth of the model because of the recursive
computation (Jacot et al., 2018), the computational cost of the TNTK does not depend on the depth, as
shown in Equation (7). This results in much faster computation than the MLP-induced NTK when the
depth increases, as illustrated in the right panel of Figure 7. Even if the MLP-induced NTK is better
in prediction accuracy, the TNTK may be used in practical cases as a trade-off for computational
complexity. Arora et al. (2019) proposed the use of the NTK for a neural architecture search (Elsken
et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2021). In such applications, the fast computation of the kernel in various
architectures can be a benefit. We leave extensions of this idea to tree models as future work.
Consistency with implications from the TNTK theory. When we increase the tree depth, we
initially observe an improvement in performance, after which the performance gradually decreases.
This behavior is consistent with the performance deterioration due to degeneracy (Section 4.2.3),
similar to that reported for neural networks without skip-connection (Huang et al., 2020), shown by a
dotted yellow line. The performance improvement by adjusting α in the decision function (Frosst
& Hinton, 2017) is also observed. Performances with hard (α > 0.5) decision functions are always
better than the sigmoid-like function (α = 0.5, as shown in Figure 2).


6   Conclusion

In this paper, we have introduced and studied the Tree Neural Tangent Kernel (TNTK) by considering
the ensemble of infinitely many soft trees. The TNTK provides new insights into the behavior of the
infinite ensemble of soft trees, such as the effect of the oblivious tree structure and the degeneracy


                                                  9
of the TNTK induced by the deepening of the trees. In numerical experiments, we have observed
the degeneracy phenomena induced by the deepening of the soft tree model, which is suggested by
our theoretical results. To date, the NTK theory has been mostly applied to neural networks, and
our study is the first to apply it to the tree model. Therefore our study represents a milestone in the
development of the NTK theory.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number JP21H03503d, Japan), JST PRESTO
(Grant Number JPMJPR1855, Japan), and JST FOREST (Grant Number JPMJFR206J, Japan).

References
Sina Alemohammad, Zichao Wang, Randall Balestriero, and Richard Baraniuk. The Recurrent Neural
  Tangent Kernel. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

Sercan Ömer Arik and Tomas Pfister. TabNet: Attentive Interpretable Tabular Learning. CoRR,
  abs/1908.07442, 2019.

Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  Exact Computation with an Infinitely Wide Neural Net. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.

Sanjeev Arora, Simon S. Du, Zhiyuan Li, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ruosong Wang, and Dingli Yu. Har-
  nessing the Power of Infinitely Wide Deep Nets on Small-data Tasks. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2020.

Peter L. Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian Complexities: Risk Bounds and
  Structural Results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3, 2003.

Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-learning
 practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 116(32), 2019.

Leo Breiman, Jerome Friedman, Charles J. Stone, and R.A. Olshen. Classification and Regression
  Trees. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 1984.

Wuyang Chen, Xinyu Gong, and Zhangyang Wang. Neural Architecture Search on ImageNet in
 Four GPU Hours: A Theoretically Inspired Perspective. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2021.

Lénaïc Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On Lazy Training in Differentiable Programming.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.

Yann N Dauphin, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex
  optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27, 2014.

Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu Zhai. Gradient Descent Finds Global
  Minima of Deep Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019a.

Simon S Du, Kangcheng Hou, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Barnabas Poczos, Ruosong Wang, and Keyulu
  Xu. Graph Neural Tangent Kernel: Fusing Graph Neural Networks with Graph Kernels. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019b.

Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI Machine Learning Repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.

Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural Architecture Search: A Survey.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(55):1–21, 2019.


                                                  10
Manuel Fernández-Delgado, Eva Cernadas, Senén Barro, and Dinani Amorim. Do we Need Hundreds
 of Classifiers to Solve Real World Classification Problems? Journal of Machine Learning Research,
 15, 2014.
Nicholas Frosst and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Distilling a Neural Network Into a Soft Decision Tree.
  CoRR, 2017.
Hussein Hazimeh, Natalia Ponomareva, Petros Mol, Zhenyu Tan, and Rahul Mazumder. The Tree
  Ensemble Layer: Differentiability meets Conditional Computation. In Proceedings of the 37th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2016.
Kaixuan Huang, Yuqing Wang, Molei Tao, and Tuo Zhao. Why Do Deep Residual Networks
  Generalize Better than Deep Feedforward Networks? — A Neural Tangent Kernel Perspective. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clement Hongler. Neural Tangent Kernel: Convergence and
  Generalization in Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31.
  2018.
M.I. Jordan and R.A. Jacobs. Hierarchical mixtures of experts and the EM algorithm. In Proceedings
  of 1993 International Conference on Neural Networks, volume 2, 1993.
Ajaykrishna Karthikeyan, Naman Jain, Nagarajan Natarajan, and Prateek Jain. Learning Accurate
  Decision Trees with Bandit Feedback via Quantized Gradient Descent. CoRR, 2021.
Guolin Ke, Zhenhui Xu, Jia Zhang, Jiang Bian, and Tie-Yan Liu. DeepGBM: A Deep Learning
  Framework Distilled by GBDT for Online Prediction Tasks. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM
 SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2019.
Peter Kontschieder, Madalina Fiterau, Antonio Criminisi, and Samuel Rota Bulò. Deep Neural
  Decision Forests. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide Neural Networks of Any Depth Evolve as Linear Models
  Under Gradient Descent. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32,
  2019.
Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen, Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang,
 Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and Zhifeng Chen. GShard: Scaling Giant Models with Conditional
 Computation and Automatic Sharding. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2021.
Zhiyuan Li, Ruosong Wang, Dingli Yu, Simon S. Du, Wei Hu, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sanjeev
  Arora. Enhanced Convolutional Neural Tangent Kernels. CoRR, abs/1911.00809, 2019.
Haoran Luo, Fan Cheng, Heng Yu, and Yuqi Yi. SDTR: Soft Decision Tree Regressor for Tabular
  Data. IEEE Access, 9, 2021.
Andre Martins and Ramon Astudillo. From Softmax to Sparsemax: A Sparse Model of Attention
  and Multi-Label Classification. In Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 48, 2016.
Ben Peters, Vlad Niculae, and André F. T. Martins. Sparse Sequence-to-Sequence Models. In
  Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Sergei Popov, Stanislav Morozov, and Artem Babenko. Neural Oblivious Decision Ensembles for
  Deep Learning on Tabular Data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Liudmila Prokhorenkova, Gleb Gusev, Aleksandr Vorobev, Anna Veronika Dorogush, and Andrey
  Gulin. CatBoost: unbiased boosting with categorical features. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 31, 2018.


                                               11
J. R. Quinlan. Induction of Decision Trees. Machine Learning, 1(1), 1986.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc V. Le, Geoffrey E. Hinton,
  and Jeff Dean. Outrageously Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts
  Layer. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Cheng Tang, Damien Garreau, and Ulrike von Luxburg. When do random forests fail? In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31, 2018.
Ryutaro Tanno, Kai Arulkumaran, Daniel Alexander, Antonio Criminisi, and Aditya Nori. Adap-
  tive Neural Trees. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97, 2019.
Alvin Wan, Lisa Dunlap, Daniel Ho, Jihan Yin, Scott Lee, Suzanne Petryk, Sarah Adel Bargal,
  and Joseph E. Gonzalez. NBDT: Neural-Backed Decision Tree. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Christopher K. I. Williams. Computing with Infinite Networks. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 1996.


A    Proof of Theorem 1
Proof. The model output from a certain depth tree ensemble f (d) can be written alternatively using
an incremental formula as
                              M 
         (d)              1 X            >
                                                (d−1)        (l)    (l)
                                                                          
        f (xi , w, π) = √           σ wm,t  xi fm        xi , wm   , πm
                          M m=1
                                                        (d−1)                    
                                                  >                         (r) (r)
                                    + 1 − σ wm,t xi fm               xi , wm , πm     ,       (A.1)

where indices (l) and (r) used with model parameters wm and πm mean the parameters at the
(l)eft subtree and the (r)ight subtree, respectively, and t used in wm,t denotes the node at (t)op of
                                                                         (l)
the tree. For example, for trees of depth 3, as shown in Figure 1, wm = (wm,2 , wm,4 , wm,5 ),
   (r)
wm = (wm,3 , wm,6 , wm,7 ), and wm,t = wm,1 .
We prove the theorem by induction. When d = 1,
                                     M
                                 1 X      >                      >
                                                                               
            f (1) (xi , w, π) = √       σ(wm,1 xi )πm,1 + (1 − σ(wm,1 xi ))πm,2 .                (A.2)
                                  M m=1
Derivatives are
                      ∂f (1) (xi , w, π)      1                           >
                                                                                
                                         = √ (πm,1 − πm,2 ) xi σ̇ wm,1        xi ,                (A.3)
                           ∂wm,1               M
                      ∂f (1) (xi , w, π)      1       >
                                                            
                                         = √ σ wm,1       xi ,                                    (A.4)
                           ∂πm,1               M
                      ∂f (1) (xi , w, π)        1             >
                                                                     
                                         = −√       1 − σ wm,1    xi ,                            (A.5)
                           ∂πm,2                M
Therefore, since there is only one internal node per a single tree, from the definition of the NTK, the
TNTK is obtained as
                  M                                      
  (1)
                 X        ∂f (xi , w, π) ∂f (xj , w, π)
Θ (xi , xj ) =
b                                        ,
                 m=1
                              ∂wm,1            ∂wm,1
                                                                                                 !
                              ∂f (xi , w, π) ∂f (xj , w, π)           ∂f (xi , w, π) ∂f (xj , w, π)
                         +                   ,                  +                   ,
                                   ∂πm,1          ∂πm,1                  ∂πm,2            ∂πm,2
                     M
                  1 X                2
                                                                                               
              =         (πm,1 − πm,2 ) x>
                                        i x j σ̇(w >
                                                      x
                                                   m,1 i )σ̇(w >
                                                                 x
                                                              m,1 j ) + 2σ(w >
                                                                               x
                                                                            m,1 i )σ(w >
                                                                                          x
                                                                                       m,1 j )  .
                  M m=1
                                                                                         (A.6)


                                                  12
Since we are considering the infinite number of trees (M → ∞), the average in Equation (A.6) can
be replaced by the expected value by applying the law of the large numbers:
                                    "
                                      
                                                      2
               Θ(1) (xi , xj ) = Em (πm,1 − πm,2 ) x>            >           >
                                                        i xj σ̇(wm,1 xi )σ̇(wm,1 xj )

                                                                                                #
                                                                                            
                                                                 >          >
                                                           + 2σ(wm,1 xi )σ(wm,1 xj )

                             = 2(Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ) + T (xi , xj )),                (A.7)
                                                h                    i
                                                                   2
which is consistent with Equation (7). Here, Em (πm,1 − πm,2 ) = 2 because the variance of πm,`
is 1.0, and wm,1 corresponds to u in Theorem 1.
For d > 1, we divide the TNTK into four components:
   Θ(d) (xi , xj ) = Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(r) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(b) (xi , xj ) ,
where the indices (t), (l) and (r) mean the parameters of the (t)op of the tree, (l)eft subtree, and (r)ight
subtree, respectively. The index (b) implies the (b)ottom of the tree: tree leaves. With Equation (A.7),
we have
                               Θ(1),(t) (xi , xj ) = 2Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ),                          (A.8)
                                     Θ(1),(l) (xi , xj ) = 0,                                                             (A.9)
                                         (1),(r)
                                     Θ             (xi , xj ) = 0,                                                      (A.10)
                                         (1),(b)
                                     Θ             (xi , xj ) = 2T (xi , xj ).                                          (A.11)
For each component, we show the following lemmas:
Lemma 1.
                                Θ(d+1),(t) (xi , xj ) = 2T (xi , xj )Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj )                                (A.12)
Lemma 2.
                  Θ(d+1),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d+1),(r) (xi , xj )
                   = 2T (xi , xj )(Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(r) (xi , xj ))                     (A.13)
Lemma 3.
                                Θ(d+1),(b) (xi , xj ) = 2T (xi , xj )Θ(d),(b) (xi , xj )                                (A.14)
Combining them, we can derive Equation (7).

A.1     Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. An incremental formula for the model output with a certain depth tree ensemble is
                              M 
        (d)              1 X            >
                                               (d−1)        (l)    (l)
                                                                         
       f (xi , w, π) = √            σ wm,t x i fm       xi , wm   , πm
                          M m=1
                                                       (d−1)                       
                                                >                          (r)    (r)
                                    + 1 − σ wm,t   xi fm            xi , wm    , πm      ,                              (A.15)
where t used in wm,t implies the node at the top of the tree. With Equation (A.15),
∂f (d+1) (xi , w, π)              >
                                         
                                             (d)
                                                 
                                                           (l)     (l)
                                                                       
                                                                               (d)
                                                                                   
                                                                                               (r)      (r)
                                                                                                            
                        = xi σ̇(wm,t xi ) fm       x i , wm    , πm      − fm         xi , wm      , πm         ,         (A.16)
      ∂wm,t
                                M
 b (d+1),(t) (xi , xj ) = 1
                               X                                                                                                   
 Θ                                 x>          >                >
                                    i xj σ̇(wm,t xi )σ̇(wm,t xj ) fm
                                                                              (d)
                                                                                     x i , wm (l)
                                                                                                  , πm (l)
                                                                                                             fm(d)          (l)
                                                                                                                     x j , wm      (l)
                                                                                                                                , πm
                          M m=1
                                                                                                     
                                            (d)           (l)     (l)     (d)             (r)      (r)
                                      − fm        x i , wm    , πm      fm       x j , wm     , πm
                                                                                                     
                                            (d)           (r)     (r)      (d)             (l)      (l)
                                      − fm        x i , wm    , πm       fm       xj , wm      , πm
                                                                                                      
                                            (d)           (r)     (r)      (d)             (r)      (r)
                                      + fm        x i , wm    , πm       fm       xj , wm      , πm          ,            (A.17)


                                                                13
                                                              
          (d)       (r)    (r)             (d)         (l)   (l)
Since fm xi , wm , πm              and fm xj , wm , πm                are independent of each other
and have zero-mean Gaussian distribution            h      because of  the initialization iof πm
                                                      (d)          (l)   (l) (d)      (r)  (r)
with zero-mean i.i.d Gaussians2 ,                 E fm xi , wm , πm fm xj , wm , πm               and
  h                                             i
    (d)         (r)  (r)    (d)        (l)     (l)
E fm xi , wm , πm fm xj , wm , πm                     are zero. Therefore, considering the infinite
number of trees (M → ∞),
                                                    h                                                        
   Θ(d+1),(t) (xi , xj ) = x>
                            i x j Ṫ (x i , x j )Em   fm
                                                        (d)
                                                              x i , w (l)
                                                                      m   , π (l)
                                                                              m     f (d)
                                                                                      m     x j , w (l)
                                                                                                    m   , π (l)
                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                             i
                                                      (d)           (r)     (r)      (d)           (r)     (r)
                                                  + fm      xi , wm     , πm       fm      x j , wm    , πm        (A.18)
                                                                    h                                                i
                                                                        (d)                       (d)
From Equation (A.18), what we need to prove is Em fm (xi , wm , πm )fm (xj , wm , πm ) =
(2T (xi , xj ))d . We do this by induction. In the base case with d = 1,
     h                                          i
         (1)                 (1)
  Em fm      (xi , wm , πm )fm   (xj , wm , πm )
     "                                                                              #
                                                                               
               >                         >                    >          >
                                                                           
=Em σ(wm,1 xi )πm,1 + 1 − σ(wm,1 xi ) πm,2 σ(wm,1 xj )πm,1 + 1 − σ(wm,1 xj ) πm,2
         
                       >     2    >
=Em (πm,1 − πm,2 ) σ(wm,1 xi )σ(wm,1 xj )
     |     {z      }
                    →2
                                                                                                                         
                             >             >            2       >             >
             + πm,1 πm,2 (σ(wm,1 xi ) + σ(wm,1 xj )) − πm,2 (σ(wm,1 xi ) + σ(wm,1 xj ) − 1)
               | {z }                                        |            {z             }
                   →0                                                                         →0
=2T (xi , xj ) ,                                                                                                             (A.19)
where we use the property
                                                            E [σ(v)] = 0.5                                                   (A.20)
for any v generated from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution. The subscript arrows (→) show what
the expected value will be.
Next, when the depth is d + 1,
      h                                                i
        (d+1)                   (d+1)
 Em fm        (xi , wm , πm )fm         (xj , wm , πm )
     "
                                                                (d)                    
             >        (d)         (l)     (l)            >                      (r)    (r)
=Em σ(wm,t      xi )fm      xi , wm   , πm      + 1 − σ(wm,t xi ) fm     x i , wm   , πm

                                                                                                                    #
                                                                                                             
                 >        (d)              (l)    (l)                  >           (d)             (r)    (r)
                                                                              
              σ(wm,t xj )fm          xj , wm   , πm         +   1 − σ(wm,t xj )   fm         xj , wm   , πm
                                                                                                                            
     (d)    (l)     (l)
                            
                                  (d)
                                      
                                               (r)     (r)
                                                           
                                                                  >             (d)
                                                                                    
                                                                                             (r)
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                     (r) 
=Em  fm xi , wm
                  , πm      − f m     xi , w m   , πm       σ(w m,t x i ) + f m     xi , w m   , πm    
      |                             {z                                   } |               {z           }
                                                   (A)                                                     (B)
                                                                                                                              
              (d)    (l)     (l)
                                    
                                          (d)
                                              
                                                       (r)     (r)
                                                                   
                                                                          >             (d)
                                                                                            
                                                                                                       (r)
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                               (r) 
              fm xj , wm
                           , πm      − f m     xj , w m   , πm       σ(w m,t x j ) + fm      x j , w m    , πm     ,
              |                             {z                                    } |               {z            }
                                                   (C)                                                      (D)
                                                                                                                             (A.21)
where the last equality sign is just a simplification to separate components (A), (B), (C), and (D).
       (d)       (r)  (r)        (d)       (l)   (l)
Since fm (xi , wm , πm ) and fm (xj , wm , πm ) are independent of each other and have zero-mean
   2
       This holds because the model output is a weighted average of πm,` .


                                                                  14
i.i.d Gaussian distribution, we obtain
                                         h                                                         
                                            (d)             (l)     (l)     (d)           (l)     (l)
      Em [(A) × (C)] = T (xi , xj ) Em fm          x i , wm     , πm      fm      x j , wm    , πm
                                                                                                         i
                                                 (d)             (r)     (r)     (d)            (r)     (r)
                                           +fm          x i , wm     , πm      fm       xj , wm     , πm       ,   (A.22)
                                  h                                                          i
                                     (d)           (r)       (r)      (d)          (r)      (r)
      Em [(B) × (C)] = −0.5 Em fm          x i , wm     , πm       fm       xj , wm     , πm        ,              (A.23)
                                  h                                                          i
                                     (d)           (r)       (r)      (d)          (r)      (r)
      Em [(A) × (D)] = −0.5 Em fm          x i , wm     , πm       fm       xj , wm     , πm        ,              (A.24)
                          h                                                          i
                              (d)          (r)     (r)       (d)            (r)    (r)
      Em [(B) × (D)] = Em fm        xi , wm    , πm       fm        x j , wm    , πm        .                      (A.25)
Equation (A.23), Equation (A.24), and Equation (A.25) cancel each other out. Therefore, we obtain
                         h                                                 i
                            (d+1)                    (d+1)
                     Em fm        (xi , wm , πm )fm        (xj , wm , πm )
                                        h                                          i
                                          (d)                   (d)
                   =2T (xi , xj ) Em fm       (xi , wm , πm )fm     (xj , wm , πm ) .      (A.26)
By h      induction    hypothesis      iand     Equation          (A.19),         we      have
      (d)             (d)
Em fm (xi , wm , πm )fm (xj , wm , πm ) = (2T (xi , xj ))d . Therefore, the original lemma also
follows.

A.2     Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. When the depth is d + 1, the derivatives of the parameters in the left subtree and the right
subtree are                                                           
                                                                     (d)          (l)   (l)
                      ∂f (d+1) (xi , w, π)               ∂fm               x i , wm , π m
                                                >
                                           = σ(wm,t xi )                                ,                          (A.27)
                            ∂wm,l                                           ∂wm,l
                                                                                             
                                                                             (d)     (r)  (r)
                  ∂f (d+1) (xi , w, π)             >
                                                                          ∂fm xi , wm , πm
                                       = 1 − σ(wm,t  xi )                            ,           (A.28)
                        ∂wm,r                                        ∂wm,r
where l and r used in wm,l and wm,r implies the node at the left subtree and right subtree, respectively.
Therefore, the limiting TNTK for the left subtree is
 Θ(d+1),(l) (xi , xj ) = T (xi , xj )(Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(r) (xi , xj )). (A.29)
Similarly, for the right subtree, since
                                                                                                       

       E[(1 − σ(u> xi )(1 − σ(u> xj )] = E 1 − σ(u> xi ) − σ(u> xj ) +σ(u> xi )σ(u> xj )
                                                | {z } | {z }
                                                                  →0.5           →0.5
                                                 = E[σ(u> xi )σ(u> xj )],                                          (A.30)
we can also derive
 Θ(d+1),(r) (xi , xj ) = T (xi , xj )(Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(r) (xi , xj )). (A.31)
Finally, we obtain the following by combining with Equation (A.29) and Equation (A.31),
            Θ(d+1),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d+1),(r) (xi , xj )
             = 2T (xi , xj ) (Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(l) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(r) (xi , xj )).                    (A.32)


A.3     Proof of Lemma 3

Proof. With Equation (1) and Equation (6),
             ∂f (xi , w, π)     1
                            = √ µm,` (xi , wm )
                 ∂πm,`          M
                                     N
                                1 Y        >
                                                  1`.n        >
                                                                      1n&`
                            =√          σ wm,n xi       1 − σ wm,n xi        .                                     (A.33)
                                M n=1


                                                             15
When we focus on a leaf `, for a tree with depth of d, 1n&` or 1`.n equals to 1 d times. There-
fore, by Equation (A.30), we can say that there is a T (xi , xj )d contribution to the limiting kernel
Θ(d),(b) (xi , xj ) per leaf index ` ∈ [L]. Since there are 2d leaf indices in the perfect binary tree,

                                Θ(d+1),(b) (xi , xj ) = (2T (xi , xj ))d .                       (A.34)
In other words, since the number of leaves doubles with each additional depth, we can say
                         Θ(d+1),(b) (xi , xj ) = 2T (xi , xj )Θ(d),(b) (xi , xj ) .              (A.35)



A.4   Closed-form formula for the scaled error function

Since we are using the scaled error function as a decision function defined as
                                                      >
                                                             
                            gm,n (wm,n , xi ) = σ wm,n    xi
                                                 1          >
                                                                   1
                                              = erf αwm,n      xi + ,                            (A.36)
                                                 2                    2
T and Ṫ in Theorem 1 can be calculated analytically. Closed-form solutions for the error function
(Williams, 1996; Lee et al., 2019) are known to be
                                                                                                   !
                                                 2                        Σ(xi , x j )
Terf (xi , xj ) := E[erf(u> xi ) erf(u> xj )] = arcsin p                                              ,
                                                 π         (Σ(xi , xi ) + 0.5)(Σ(xj , xj ) + 0.5)
                                                                                               (A.37)
                       ˙    >      ˙    >        4                         1
Ṫerf (xi , xj ) := E[erf(u   xi )erf(u   xj )] = p                                                      .
                                                 π (1 + 2Σ(xi , xi )) (1 + 2Σ(xj , xj )) − 4Σ(xi , xj )2
                                                                                               (A.38)

Using the above equations, we can calculate T and Ṫ with the scaled error function as
                                                                                       
                       1                                     1               1               1
   T (xi , xj ) = E      erf(αu> xi ) erf(αu> xj ) + E         erf(αu> xi ) + erf(αu> xj ) +
                       4                                     4               4               4
                   1                                    1
                 = E erf(αu> xi ) erf(αu> xj ) +
                                                   
                   4                                     4                   !
                    1                            α2 Σ(xi , xj )                     1
                 =     arcsin p                                                  + ,        (A.39)
                   2π                2                      2
                                  (α Σ(xi , xi ) + 0.5)(α Σ(xj , xj ) + 0.5)        4
                   α2 h ˙               ˙
                                                      i
   Ṫ (xi , xj ) =    E erf(αu> xi )erf(αu     >
                                                 xj )
                    4
                   α2                                   1
                 =     p                                                                .   (A.40)
                   π     (1 + 2α2 Σ(xi , xi )) (1 + 2α2 Σ(xj , xj )) − 4α4 Σ(xi , xj )2

B     Neural tangent kernel for multi-layer perceptron
B.1   Equivalence between the two-layer perceptron and trees of depth 1

In the following, we describe a two-layer perceptron using the same symbols used in soft trees
(Section 2.1) to make it easier to see the correspondences between a two-layer perceptron and a soft
tree ensemble. A two-layer perceptron is given as
                                                       M
                                                   1 X          >
                                                                    
                           fMLP (2) (xi , w, a) = √       am σ wm xi ,                            (B.1)
                                                    M m=1
where we use M as the number of the hidden layer nodes, σ as a nonlinear activation function, and
w = (w1 , . . . , wM ) ∈ RF ×M and a = (a1 , . . . , aM ) ∈ R1×M as parameters at the first and second


                                                    16
layers initialized by zero-mean Gaussians with unit variances. Since
                                ∂fMLP (2) (xi , w, a)    1            >
                                                                          
                                                      = √ am xi σ̇ wm   xi ,                                                    (B.2)
                                      ∂wm                M
                                ∂fMLP (2) (xi , w, a)    1     >
                                                                    
                                                      = √ σ wm    xi ,                                                          (B.3)
                                       ∂am               M
we have
                                                                              
                                M
      b MLP (2) (xi , xj ) = 1
                               X   2 >       >        >         >       >
                                                                          
      Θ                           a x xj σ̇ wm xi σ̇ wm xj + σ wm xi σ wm xj  .
                                                                               
                             M m=1 | m i      {z           }  |      {z      }
                                              contribution from the first layer           contribution from the second layer
                                                                                                                                (B.4)

Considering the infinite width limit (M → ∞), we have

                           ΘMLP (2) (xi , xj ) = Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ) + T (xi , xj ),                                       (B.5)

which is the same as the limiting TNTK shown in Equation (7) with d = 1 up to constant multiple.

B.2      Formula for the MLP-induced NTK

Based on Arora et al. (2019), we defined the L-hidden-layer perceptron3 as
                                                                                       !
                                         1             1                   1        
                            (L+1)               (L)            (L−1)             (1)
fMLP (L) (xi , W ) = W                ·√    σ W     ·p     σ W       ... √    σ W xi      ,
                                         ML           ML−1                 M1
                                                                                      (B.6)

where W (1) ∈ RM1 ×F , W (h) ∈ RMh ×Mh−1 , and W (L+1)           ∈ R1×ML are trainable parameters.
                                        (1)         (L+1)
We initialize all the weights W = W , . . . , W              to values independently drawn from the
standard normal distribution. Considering the limit of the infinite width M1 , M2 , . . . , ML → ∞, the
formula for the limiting NTK of L-hidden-layer MLP is known to be
                                     L+1                        L+1
                                                                                      !
                                                                        (h0 )
                                     X                          Y
                   MLP(L)                     (h−1)
                 Θ        (x , x ) =
                                  i     j   Σ       (x , x ) ·      iΣ̇   j   (x , x ) ,          (B.7)
                                                                                                   i    j
                                            h=1                                   h0 =h

where

                    Σ(0) (xi , xj ) := x>
                                        i xj ,                                                                                  (B.8)
                                        (h−1)                            (h−1)
                                                                                               
                                          Σ      (xi , xi )             Σ      (xi , xj )
                    Λ(h) (xi , xj ) :=                                                             ∈ R2×2 ,                     (B.9)
                                          Σ(h−1) (xj , xi )             Σ(h−1) (xj , xj )
                    Σ(h) (xi , xj ) := Eu,v∼Normal(0,Λ(h) (xi ,xj )) [σ(u)σ (v))] ,                                            (B.10)
                    Σ̇(h) (xi , xj ) := Eu,v∼Normal(0,Λ(h) (xi ,xj )) [σ̇(u)σ̇ (v))] .                                         (B.11)

We let Σ̇(L+1) (xi , xj ) := 1 for convenience. See Arora et al. (2019) for derivation. There is a
correspondence between Σ(1) (xi , xj ) and Σ (xi , xj ) in Theorem 1, Σ(1) (xi , xj ) and T (xi , xj ) in
Theorem 1, and Σ̇(1) (xi , xj ) and Ṫ (xi , xj ) in Theorem 1, respectively.
Since the recursive calculation is needed in Equation (B.7), the computational cost increases as the
layers get deeper. It can be seen that the effect of increasing depth is different from that of the limiting
TNTK, in which the depth of the tree affects only the value of the exponential power as shown in
Equation (7). Therefore, for any tree depth larger than 1, the limiting NTK induced by the MLP with
any number of layers and the limiting TNTK do not match.
   3
       Note that the two-layer perceptron is the single-hidden-layer perceptron.


                                                            17
C    Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. As shown in Section 4.1.1, there is a close correspondence between the soft tree ensemble of
depth 1 and the two-layer perceptron. On one hand, from Equation (A.7), the limiting TNTK induced
by infinite trees with the depth of 1 is 2(Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ) + T (xi , xj )). On the other hand, if the
activation function used in the two-layer perceptron is same as σ defined in Equation (5), the NTK
induced by the infinite width two-layer MLP is Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ) + T (xi , xj ) (Jacot et al., 2018;
Lee et al., 2019). Hence these are exactly the same kernel up to constant multiple.
The conditions under which the MLP-induced NTK are positively definite have already been studied.
Lemma 4 (Jacot et al. (2018)). For a non-polynomial Lipschitz nonlinearity σ, for any input
dimension F , the NTK induced by the infinite width MLP is positive definite if kxi k2 = 1 for all
i ∈ [N ] and xi 6= xj (i 6= j).

Note that σ defined in Equation (5) has the non-polynomial Lipschitz nonlinearity. Since the positive
definite kernel multiplied by a constant is a positive definite kernel, it follows that the limiting TNTK
Θ(1) (xi , xj ) for the depth 1 is also positive definite.
As shown in Equation (C.1), as the trees get deeper, T (xi , xj ) defined in Equation (8) is multiplied
multiple times in the limiting TNTK:
            Θ(d) (xi , xj ) = 2d d Σ(xi , xj )(T (xi , xj ))d−1 Ṫ (xi , xj ) + (2T (xi , xj ))d
                              |                   {z                       }    |     {z       }
                                         contribution from inner nodes               contribution from leaves

                           = 2(2T (xi , xj ))d−1 (d Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ) + T (xi , xj )) .                  (C.1)
                                                 |                  {z                     }
                                                       NTK induced by two-layer perceptron (if d = 1)

The positive definiteness of T (xi , xj ) has already been proven.
Lemma 5 (Jacot et al. (2018)). For a non-polynomial Lipschitz nonlinearity σ, for any input
dimension F , the T (xi , xj ) := E[σ(u> xi )σ(u> xj )] defined in Theorem 1 is positive definite if
kxi k2 = 1 for all i ∈ [N ] and xi 6= xj (i 6= j).

Note that d Σ(xi , xj )Ṫ (xi , xj ) + T (xi , xj ) for d ∈ N is positive definite. Since the product of the
positive definite kernel is positive definite, for infinite trees of arbitrary depth, the positive definiteness
of Θ(d) (xi , xj ) holds under the same conditions as in MLP.

D    Proof of Theorem 2
Proof. We use the following lemmas in the proof.
Lemma 6. Let a ∈ Rn be a random vector whose entries are independent standard normal random
                                                                 2
variables. For every v ≥ 0, with probability at least 1 − 2n e(−v n/2) we have:
                                            kak1 ≤ vn.                                 (D.1)
Lemma 7. Let ai ∈ R≥0 . We have
                                                      v
                                      n               u n
                                     X   √        √   uX
                                            ai ≤ nt         ai .                       (D.2)
                                         i=1                     i=1

In addition, our proof is based on the strategy used in Lee et al. (2019), which relies on the local
Lipschitzness of the model Jacobian at initialization J (x, θ), whose (i, j) entry is ∂f ∂θ
                                                                                         (xi ,θ)
                                                                                            j
                                                                                                 where θj
is a j-th component of θ:
Theorem 4 (Lee et al. (2019)). Assume that the limiting NTK induced by any model architecture is
positive definite for input sets x, such that minimum eigenvalue of the NTK λmin > 0. For models
with local Lipschitz Jacobian trained under gradient flow with a learning rate η < 2(λmin + λmax ),
we have with high probability:
                                                                       
                           sup Θ                  b ∗ (xi , xj ) = O √1
                                 b ∗ (xi , xj ) − Θ                       .                 (D.3)
                                   τ                0
                                                                      M

                                                        18
                                                      Probability
                           10 16
                           10 36
                           10 56
                           10 76
                           10 96
                           10 116
                           10 136

                                    100                             101
                                                            n

Figure 8: Right-hand side of the Equation (D.7), where c = 5n (in other words, v = 5 in Lemma 6).


It is not obvious whether or not the soft tree ensemble’s Jacobian is local Lipschitz. Therefore, we
prove Lemma 8 to prove Theorem 2.
Lemma 8. For soft tree ensemble models with the NTK initialization and a positive finite scaling
factor α, there is K > 0 such that for every C > 0, with high probability, the following holds:
                  
                               kJ (x, θ)kF ≤ K
                                                             , ∀θ, θ̃ ∈ B (θ0 , C) ,           (D.4)
                    kJ (x, θ) − J (x, θ̃)kF ≤ Kkθ − θ̃k2
where
                                    B (θ0 , C) := {θ : kθ − θ0 k2 < C} .                       (D.5)

By proving that the soft tree ensemble’s Jacobian under the NTK initialization is the local Lipschitz
with high probability, we extend Theorem 2 for the TNTK.

D.1     Proof of Lemma 6

Proof. By use of the Chebyshev’s inequality, for some constant c, we obtain

                         P (kak1 > c) ≤ E[eγkak1 ]/eγc
                                         2              √ n
                                      = eγ /2 (1 + erf(γ/ 2)) /eγc ,                           (D.6)
                                         √
where P means a probability. Since erf(γ/ 2) ≤ 1, when we use γ = c/n, we get
                                                                    2
                                          P (kak1 > c) ≤ 2n e(−c /2n) .                        (D.7)
Lemma 6 can be obtained by assigning vn to c.

Figure 8 shows the right-hand side of the Equation (D.7) with c = 5n. when n = 1, probability is
7.45 × 10−6 . As n becomes larger, the probability becomes even smaller.

D.2     Proof of Lemma 7

Proof. By use of Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, for p, q, x, y ∈ R≥0 , we have
                             √       √       p
                            p x + q y ≤ (p2 + q 2 ) (x + y).                                   (D.8)
With Equation (D.8), we prove the lemma by induction. In the base case,
                                  √     √      √ √
                                    a1 + a2 ≤ 2 a1 + a2 ,                                      (D.9)


                                                       19
which is consistent to the lemma. Next, when we assume
                              √             √     √ √
                                a1 + · · · + ak ≤ k a1 + · · · ak ,                                                   (D.10)
we have
                    √                   √          √           √            √      √
                        a1 + · · · +        ak +       ak+1 = ( a1 + · · · + ak ) + ak+1
                                                              √ √                  √
                                                            ≤ k a1 + · · · + ak + ak+1
                                                              √     p
                                                            ≤ k + 1 a1 + · · · + ak + ak+1 .                          (D.11)


D.3     Proof of Lemma 8

Proof. Consider the contribution of the leaf parameters at first:
                                        ∂f (xi , w, π)    1
                                                       = √ µm,` (xi , wm ).                                           (D.12)
                                            ∂πm,`         M
Next, the contribution from the leaf parameters is
                                                         L
                    ∂f (xi , w, π)   1 X      ∂µm,` (xi , wm )
                                   =√    πm,`
                       ∂wm,n          M          ∂wm,n
                                                         `=1
                                                         L
                                               1 X                               >
                                                                                       
                                             =√       πm,` Sn,` (xi , wm )xi σ̇ wm,n xi ,                             (D.13)
                                                M `=1
where
                         N
                                                                                                                  !
                         Y
                                      >
                                              1(`.n0 )&(n6=n0 )                 >
                                                                                            1(n0 &`)&(n6=n0 )
 Sn,` (x, wm ) :=               σ    wm,n0 xi                             1−σ   wm,n 0 xi                         (−1)1n&` ,
                        n0 =1
                                                                                                                      (D.14)
and & is a logical conjunction. For any real scalar p and q, the scaled error function σ defined in
Equation (5) is bounded as follows:
 0 ≤ σ(p) ≤ 1,       |σ(p) − σ(q)| ≤ |p − q|,                  0 ≤ σ̇(p) ≤ α,       |σ̇(p) − σ̇(q)| ≤ α|p − q|. (D.15)
Therefore, the absolute value of Sn,` does not exceed 1. With Equation (D.15), we can obtain
                  ∂µm,` (xi , wm )                            >
                                                                    
                                      = Sn,` (xi , wm )xi σ̇ wm,n xi 2 ≤ αkxi k2           (D.16)
                      ∂wm,n        2

with high probability. Therefore, with Lemma 6, in probability,
                    N
                    X
  kJ (x, θ)k2F =           kJ (xi , w)k2F +kJ (xi , π)k2F
                                                                      
                    i=1
                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                     
                      N M                   N         L                                         L
                    1 XX                    X         X        ∂µm,` (xi , wm )                X
                                                                                                      µm,` (xi , wm )2 
                                                                                                                      
               =                                        πm,`                    +
                    M i=1 m=1               n=1
                                                                    ∂wm,n
                                                     `=1                        2   `=1
                                             N                      L
                           N        M
                                                                       !
                    1 XX                    X                       X
               ≤                                v 2 L2 α2 kxi k22 +   1
                    M i=1 m=1             n=1                         `=1
                    N
                    X
               =          L(v 2 Lα2 N kxi k22 +1).                                                                    (D.17)
                    i=1

Next, we will consider the Jacobian difference. Since µm,` (xi , wm ) is a multiple multiplication of
the decision function, by use of
                               n
                               Y            n
                                            Y            n
                                                         X
                                     pi −         qi ≤         |pi − qi |   for |pi | , |qi | ≤ 1,                    (D.18)
                               i=1          i=1          i=1



                                                                 20
we obtain


                                              N
                                              Y
                                                       >
                                                                 1`.n           >
                                                                                               1n&`
     |µm,` (xi , wm ) − µm,` (xi , w̃m )| =         σ wm,n xi             1 − σ wm,n xi
                                              n=1
                                                    N
                                                    Y
                                                              >
                                                                       1`.n            >
                                                                                                  1n&`
                                               −          σ w̃m,n xi            1 − σ w̃m,n xi
                                                    n=1
                                              N
                                              X
                                                       >
                                                                 1`.n          >
                                                                                               1n&`
                                        ≤           σ wm,n xi            1 − σ wm,n xi
                                              n=1
                                                            >
                                                                       1`.n             >
                                                                                                   1n&`
                                                      − σ w̃m,n xi               1 − σ w̃m,n xi
                                              N
                                              X
                                                    >          >
                                        ≤         |wm,n xi − w̃m,n xi |
                                              n=1
                                              N
                                              X
                                        ≤         kxi k2 kwm,n − w̃m,n k2 ,                                (D.19)
                                              n=1




where it should be noted that (` . n) & (n & `) must be false.
Sn,` (xi , wm ) − Sn,` (xi , w̃m ) can be bound in the same way as Equation (D.19). Therefore, we
also obtain


 ∂µm,` (xi , wm ) ∂µm,` (xi , w̃m )                               >
                                                                                                   >
                                                                                                           
                 −                    = kSn,` (xi , wm ) xi σ̇ wm,n   xi − Sn,` (xi , w̃m ) xi σ̇ w̃m,n xi k2
    ∂wm,n            ∂ w̃m,n        2
                                                                     >                              >
                                                                                                           
                                      = kxi k2 |Sn,` (xi , wm ) σ̇ wm,n  xi − Sn,` (xi , w̃m ) σ̇ w̃m,n  xi |
                                               
                                                                                          >
                                                                                                 
                                      ≤ kxi k2 |(Sn,` (xi , wm ) − Sn,` (xi , w̃m ))σ̇ wm,n   xi |
                                                                                                         
                                                                >              >
                                                                                      
                                                      + |(σ̇ wm,n   xi − σ̇ w̃m,n  xi )Sn,` (xi , w̃m ) |
                                               
                                      ≤ kxi k2 |α(Sn,` (xi , wm ) − Sn,` (xi , w̃m ))|
                                                                                     
                                                               >           >
                                                      + |(α(wm,n   xi − w̃m,n xi ))|
                                                           N
                                                           X
                                          ≤ 2αkxi k22          kwm,n − w̃m,n k2 .                          (D.20)
                                                           n=1




To link Equation (D.19) and Equation (D.20) to the kθ − θ̃k2 , we use Lemma 7 to obtain the following
inequalities:


                   N
                   X                           √                          √
                       kwm,n − w̃m,n k2 ≤           N kwm − w̃m k2 ≤           N kθ − θ̃k2 ,               (D.21)
                   n=1
                         L
                         X                  √               √
                           |πm,` − π̃m,` | ≤ Lkπm − π̃m k2 ≤ Lkθ − θ̃k2 .                                  (D.22)
                         `=1



                                                     21
With Equation (D.1), Equation (D.16), Equation (D.19), Equation (D.20), Equation (D.21), and
Equation (D.22),

    kJ (x, θ) − J (x, θ̃)k2F
    N
    X
=         (kJ (xi , w) − J (xi , w̃)k2F +kJ (xi , π) − J (xi , π̃)k2F )
    i=1
     N   M   N                 L                                                            2!
  1 XX X                       X               ∂µm,` (xi , wm )         ∂µm,` (xi , w̃m )
=                                         πm,`                  − π̃m,`
  M i=1 m=1 n=1                                   ∂wm,n                    ∂ w̃m,n
                               `=1                                                             2
                          L
                                                                        !
                          X
                      +         (µm,` (xi , wm ) − µm,` (xi , w̃m ))2
                          `=1
       N X
         M           N         L                                                                                                  2!
  1    X             X         X                          ∂µm,` (xi , wm )         ∂µm,` (xi , wm ) ∂µm,` (xi , w̃m )
=                                         (πm,` − π̃m,` )                  +                       −                        π̃m,`
  M i=1 m=1         n=1
                                                             ∂wm,n                    ∂wm,n            ∂ w̃m,n
                               `=1                                                                                                    2
                          L
                                                                        !
                          X
                      +         (µm,` (xi , wm ) − µm,` (xi , w̃m ))2
                          `=1


      N   M   N                     L                                               N
                                                                                                              !!2 !
   1 XX X                           X                                               X
 ≤                                        (|πm,` − π̃m,` |αkxi k2 ) +   2αkxi k22       kwm,n − w̃m,n k2 vL
   M i=1 m=1 n=1                                                                    n=1
                                    `=1
                              L N
                                                                     !2 !
                              X X
                          +                kxi k2 kwm,n − w̃m,n k2
                              `=1    n=1
              N
      N   M
                                                                                                    !
   1 X X X √                                  √              2
 ≤                  Lkθ − θ̃k2 αkxi k2 + 2αkxi k22 N kθ − θ̃k2 vL
   M i=1 m=1 n=1
                 L
                                        !2 !
                 X √
              +      N kxi k2 kθ − θ̃k2
                              `=1
     N
                                                    !
     X         √                  √   2
 ≤           N α Lkxi k2 +2αkxi k2 N vL + LN kxi k2 kθ − θ̃k22 .
                                 2                2
                                                                                                               (D.23)
     i=1

By considering the square root of both sides in Equation (D.17) and Equation (D.23), we conclude
the proof for Lemma 8.

E      Proof of Theorem 3
Proof. We can use the same approach with the proof of Theorem 1. Using an incremental formula,
the output from the oblivious tree ensembles can be written as follows:
                                       M 
                                   1 X        >
                                                     (d−1)                    
              f (d) (xi , w, π) = √        σ wm,t xi fm              (s)
                                                              x i , wm      (l)
                                                                         , πm
                                    M m=1
                                                             (d−1)                        
                                                      >                           (s)    (r)
                                           + 1 − σ wm,t  x i fm            xi , wm    , πm      ,               (E.1)

                    (s)
where (s) of wm means (s)hared parameters at subtrees. Intuitively, the fundamental of Theorem 3
is that the outputs of the left subtree and right subtree are still independent with the oblivious tree
structure. Even with parameter sharing at the same depth, since the leaf parameters π are not shared,
the outputs of the left subtree and right subtree are independent.
We will see that Lemma 1, 2 and 3 are also valid for oblivious tree ensembles.


                                                              22
Correspondence to Lemma 1. To show the correspondence to Lemma 1, it is sufficient to show
that Equation (A.22), Equation (A.23), Equation (A.24), and Equation (A.25) hold when
      h                                            i
        (d+1)                 (d+1)
  Em fm       (xi , wm , πm )fm     (xj , wm , πm )
                                                                                    
     (d)    (s)     (l)
                            
                                  (d)
                                      
                                               (s)     (r)
                                                           
                                                                  >           (d)
                                                                                  
                                                                                           (s)
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                   (r) 
=Em  fm xi , wm
                  , πm      − f m     xi , w m   , π m      σ(wm,t xi ) + f m     xi , w m   , π m   
       |                            {z                                 } |               {z           }
                                                 (A)                                                         (B)
                                                                                                                                 
            (d)    (s)     (l)
                                  
                                        (d)
                                            
                                                      (s)     (r)
                                                                  
                                                                        >             (d)
                                                                                          
                                                                                                     (s)
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                             (r) 
            fm xj , wm
                         , π m     − fm      x j , w m   , πm      σ(w m,t x j ) + fm      x j , w m    , πm     .
            |                             {z                                    } |               {z            }
                                                  (C)                                                         (D)
                                                                                                                                  (E.2)
This equation corresponds to Equation (A.21). Here, since the leaf parameters π are not shared, the
outputs of the left subtree and right subtree are still independent even with the oblivious tree structure.
Therefore, we can obtain the correspondences to Equation (A.22), Equation (A.23), Equation (A.24),
and Equation (A.25) with the same procedures.
Correspondence to Lemma 2. For the depth d + 1, since
                                                                         
                                                (d)           (s)     (r)
          ∂f (d+1)
                   (xi , w, π)               ∂fm      x i , w m   , πm
                                    >
                               = σ(wm,t xi )
                ∂wm,s                                 ∂wm,s
                                                                                       
                                                                       (d)      (s) (r)
                                                                    ∂fm xi , wm , πm
                                                      >
                                                                
                                      + 1 − σ(wm,t          xi )                          ,                                       (E.3)
                                                                             ∂wm,s
the corresponding limiting TNTK is

  Θ(d+1),(s) (xi , xj )
                                                                                                   >
   d                            (d)           (s) (r)                         (d)          (s)     (r)
  X                          ∂fm      x i , wm , πm                        ∂fm      xi , w m   , π m
                    >                                            >
                                                                         
=     Em σ(wm,t       xi )                            + 1 − σ(wm,t xi )
                                                                                                        
  s=2
                                      ∂w    m,s                                     ∂w   m,s

                                                                                                                               
                                    (d)            (s)   (r)                                   (d)                  (s)     (r)
                                ∂fm           xj , wm , πm                                 ∂fm          x j , wm , π m
                    >                                                       >
                σ(wm,t xj )                                       + 1 − σ(wm,t xj )                                               
                                              ∂wm,s                                                      ∂wm,s
                                                                                                                                            >
                      (d)          (s)  (l)
                                                
                                                       (d)
                                                           
                                                                     (s) (r)
                                                                             
                                                                                    (d)
                                                                                        
                                                                                                 (s)
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      (r) 
  d                      ∂fm   x   , w m , πm       ∂fm      x   , wm , πm       ∂fm      x  , w m , πm
  X                            i                             i                           i               
              >
=     Em σ(wm,t xi )                           −                           +
                                                                                                         
                               ∂w                            ∂w                           ∂w
                                                                                                           
  s=2
                                   m,s                           m,s                         m,s         
                                                                               |           {z          }
           |                               {z                                 }              (B)
                                                         (A)
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                         
                                     (d)     (s)  (l)                    (d)            (s)   (r)                    (d)             (s)  (r)
                                   ∂fm xj , wm , πm                    ∂fm         xj , wm , πm                   ∂fm          xj , wm , πm     
                    >
                σ(wm,t xj )                                       −                                +                                           .
                                                                                                                                                
                                               ∂wm,s                               ∂wm,s                                       ∂wm,s            
                                                                                                              |                   {z          }
                  |                                       {z                                             }                        (D)
                                                          (C)
                                                                                                                                  (E.4)
      ∂f (d) (xi ,wm
                   (s)   (r)
                       ,πm   )    ∂f (d) (xj ,wm
                                               (s)   (l)
                                                   ,πm   )
Since m ∂wm,s                  and m ∂wm,s                 for s = {2, 3, . . . , d} are independent to each other
and have zero-mean Gaussian distribution4 , similar calculation used for Equation (A.22), Equa-
   4
       For a single oblivious tree, the number splitting rule is d because of the parameter sharing.


                                                               23
tion (A.23), Equation (A.24), and Equation (A.25) gives
                                                             >                         
                                         (d)          (s)  (l)           (d)          (s) (l)
                                      ∂f m     xi , w m , πm          ∂fm     x j , wm , πm
  Em [(A) × (C)] = T (xi , xj ) Em 
                                                                                            
                                               ∂wm,s                           ∂wm,s
                                                                     >                                
                                           (d)            (s)   (r)             (d)            (s)   (r)
                                         ∂fm         xi , wm , πm              ∂fm        xj , wm , πm
                                    +                                                                     ,
                                                                                                            
                                                     ∂wm,s                                ∂wm,s

                                                                                (E.5)
                                               >                   
                                (d)      (s) (r)        (d)      (s) (r)
                            ∂fm xi , wm , πm   ∂fm xj , wm , πm 
  Em [(B) × (C)] = −0.5 Em                                                  , (E.6)
                                      ∂wm,s                   ∂wm,s
                                                    >                            
                                (d)          (s)  (r)           (d)           (s)  (r)
                             ∂fm      xi , w m , πm          ∂fm      x j , w m , πm
 Em [(A) × (D)] = −0.5 Em                                                                , (E.7)
                                                                                      
                                      ∂wm,s                           ∂wm,s
                                                >                           
                           (d)           (s)  (r)           (d)          (s)  (r)
                        ∂fm      x i , w m , πm          ∂fm      xj , w m , πm
 Em [(B) × (D)] = Em                                                               .                       (E.8)
                                                                                 
                                 ∂wm,s                            ∂wm,s

As in the previous calculations, Equation (E.6), Equation (E.7), and Equation (E.8) cancel each other
out. As a result, we obtain
                                                                                           
             Θ(d+1),(s) (xi , xj ) = 2T (xi , xj ) Θ(d),(t) (xi , xj ) + Θ(d),(s) (xi , xj ) .  (E.9)

Correspondence to Lemma 3. Considering Equation (A.33), once we focus on a leaf `, it is not
possible for both 11&` and 1`.1 to be 1. This means that a leaf cannot belong to both the right
subtree and the left subtree. Therefore, even with the oblivious tree structure, there are no influences.
Therefore, we get exactly the same result for the Lemma 3.

F         Details of numerical experiments
F.1        Setup

F.1.1       Dataset acquisition
We use the UCI datasets (Dua & Graff, 2017) preprocessed by Fernández-Delgado et al.
(2014), which are publicly available at http://persoal.citius.usc.es/manuel.fernandez.
delgado/papers/jmlr/data.tar.gz. Since the size of the kernel is the square of the dataset size
and too many data make training impractical, we use preprocessed UCI datasets with the number of
samples smaller than 5000. Arora et al. (2020) reported the bug in the preprocess when the explicit
training/test split is given. Therefore, we do not use that dataset with explicit training/test split. As a
consequence, 90 different datasets are available.

F.1.2       Kernel specifications
TNTK. See Theorem 1 for the detailed definitions. We change the tree depth from 1 to 29 and change
α in {0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 8.0, 16.0, 32.0, 64.0}.
MLP-induced NTK. We assume the MLP activation function as ReLU. Our implementation is
based on the publicly available code5 used in Arora et al. (2020). For detailed definitions, see Arora
et al. (2020). The hyperparameter of this kernel is the model depth. We change the depth from 1 to
29. Here, depth = 1 means there is no hidden layer in the MLP.
      5
          https://github.com/LeoYu/neural-tangent-kernel-UCI


                                                        24
                                                       76

                                                       75




                                   Averaged accuracy
                                                       74

                                                       73

                                                       72

                                                       71
                                                            10 2   10 1             100        101
                                                                          used in RBF kernel

                     Figure 9: The γ dependency of the RBF kernel performance.


RBF kernel. We use scikit-learn implementation6 . The hyperparameter of this kernel is γ, in-
verse of the standard deviation of the RBF kernel (Gaussian function). For Figure 3, we tune γ in
{0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.06, 0.07, 0.08, 0.09, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0, 2.0,
3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, 9.0, 10.0, 20.0, 30.0}, resulting in 30 candidates in total. In our experi-
ments, γ = 2.0 performs the best on average (Figure 9).

F.1.3    Model specifications
We used kernel regression implemented in scikit-learn7 . To consider ridge-less situation, regulariza-
tion strength is set to be 1.0 × 10−8 , a very small constant.

F.1.4    Computational costs
Since the training and inference algorithms of the kernel regression are common across different
kernels, we analyze the computational cost of computing a single value in a gram matrix of the
corresponding kernels in the following. The time complexity of the MLP-induced NTK is linear
with respect to the layer depth, while that of the TNTK remains to be constant. Such a trend can be
seen in the right panel of Figure 7. For the RBF kernel, the computational cost remains the same
with respect to changes in hyperparameters, thus its trend is similar to the TNTK. In terms of the
space complexity, when considering a multi-layered MLP, since it is not necessary to store all past
calculation results in memory during the recursive computation, the MLP-induced NTK computation
consumes a certain amount of memory regardless of the depth of the layers. Therefore, the memory
usage is almost the same across the RBF kernel, TNTK, and MLP-induced NTK.

F.1.5    Computational resource
We used Ubuntu Linux (version: 4.15.0-117-generic) and ran all experiments on 2.20 GHz Intel Xeon
E5-2698 CPU and 252 GB of memory.

F.2     Results

F.2.1    Statistical significance of the parameter dependency
A Wilcoxon signed rank test is conducted to check the statistical significance of the differences
between different α. Figure 10 shows the p-values for the depth of 3 and 20. As shown in Figure 7,
when the tree is shallow, the accuracy started to deteriorate after around α = 8.0, but as the tree
becomes deeper, the deterioration became less apparent. Therefore, statistically significantly different
pairs for deep tress and shallow trees are different. When the tree is deep, large α shows a significant
difference over those with small α. However, when the tree is shallow, the best performance is
achieved with α of about 8.0, and if α is too large, the performance deteriorates predominantly.
   6
     https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.metrics.pairwise.rbf_
kernel.html
   7
     https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.kernel_ridge.
KernelRidge.html


                                                                            25
                                                                                         d=3                                                                                                                                                                       d = 20




                                 0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                           0        0.01                                                                                                                                                                    0    0.01




                                 2.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
                                                           0        0.08 0.9                                                                                                                                                                0    0.03 0.24




                                 4.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4.0
                                                          0.01 0.29 0.98 0.51                                                                                                                                                               0    0.06 0.46 0.83




                                 64.0 32.0 16.0 8.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  64.0 32.0 16.0 8.0
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                                                         0.4

                                                          0.06 0.94 0.2 0.01                                             0                                                                                                             0.01 0.18 0.84 0.63 0.75

                                                          0.2 0.48 0.03              0                                   0                            0                       0.2                                                      0.01 0.21 0.92 0.59 0.61 0.36                                                      0.2

                                                          0.57 0.19 0.01             0                                   0                            0       0                                                                        0.01 0.19 0.86 0.88 0.88 0.81 0.72
                                                                                                                                                                              0.0                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                          0.5       1.0       2.0   4.0                          8.0 16.0 32.0 64.0                                                                                                     0.5       1.0      2.0    4.0            8.0 16.0 32.0 64.0


           Figure 10: P-values of the Wilcoxon signed rank test for different pairs of α.
                                                                           = 0.5                                                                                     = 1.0                                                                        = 2.0                                                     = 4.0
                                100                                                                                                             100                                                         100                                                                            100

                                 80                                                                                                              80                                                          80                                                                            80
              MLP-induced NTK




                                                                                                                              MLP-induced NTK




                                                                                                                                                                                          MLP-induced NTK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MLP-induced NTK
                                 60                                                                                                              60                                                          60                                                                            60

                                 40                                                                                                              40                                                          40                                                                            40

                                 20                                                                                                              20                                                          20                                                                            20

                                     0                                                                                                            0                                                           0                                                                              0
                                                      0        20     40    60      80            100                                                     0   20   40    60   80    100                           0                    20       40    60     80    100                           0   20   40    60   80   100
                                                                        TNTK                                                                                         TNTK                                                                         TNTK                                                      TNTK
                                                                           = 8.0                                                                                     = 16.0                                                                       = 32.0                                                    = 64.0
                                100                                                                                                             100                                                         100                                                                            100

                                 80                                                                                                              80                                                          80                                                                            80
              MLP-induced NTK




                                                                                                                              MLP-induced NTK




                                                                                                                                                                                          MLP-induced NTK




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MLP-induced NTK
                                 60                                                                                                              60                                                          60                                                                            60

                                 40                                                                                                              40                                                          40                                                                            40

                                 20                                                                                                              20                                                          20                                                                            20

                                     0                                                                                                            0                                                           0                                                                              0
                                                      0        20     40    60      80            100                                                     0   20   40    60   80    100                           0                    20       40    60     80    100                           0   20   40    60   80   100
                                                                        TNTK                                                                                         TNTK                                                                         TNTK                                                      TNTK



Figure 11: Performance comparisons between the kernel regression with MLP-induced NTK and the
TNTK on the UCI dataset.
                                                                           = 0.5                                                                                     = 1.0                                                                        = 2.0                                                     = 4.0
                                100                                                                                                             100                                                         100                                                                            100

                                 80                                                                                                              80                                                          80                                                                            80

                                 60                                                                                                              60                                                          60                                                                            60
              RBF




                                                                                                                              RBF




                                                                                                                                                                                          RBF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RBF




                                 40                                                                                                              40                                                          40                                                                            40

                                 20                                                                                                              20                                                          20                                                                            20

                                     0                                                                                                            0                                                           0                                                                              0
                                                      0        20     40    60      80            100                                                     0   20   40    60   80    100                           0                    20       40    60     80    100                           0   20   40    60   80   100
                                                                        TNTK                                                                                         TNTK                                                                         TNTK                                                      TNTK
                                                                           = 8.0                                                                                     = 16.0                                                                       = 32.0                                                    = 64.0
                                100                                                                                                             100                                                         100                                                                            100

                                 80                                                                                                              80                                                          80                                                                            80

                                 60                                                                                                              60                                                          60                                                                            60
              RBF




                                                                                                                              RBF




                                                                                                                                                                                          RBF




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RBF




                                 40                                                                                                              40                                                          40                                                                            40

                                 20                                                                                                              20                                                          20                                                                            20

                                     0                                                                                                            0                                                           0                                                                              0
                                                      0        20     40    60      80            100                                                     0   20   40    60   80    100                           0                    20       40    60     80    100                           0   20   40    60   80   100
                                                                        TNTK                                                                                         TNTK                                                                         TNTK                                                      TNTK



Figure 12: Performance comparisons between the kernel regression with RBF kernel and the TNTK
on the UCI dataset.

                                                                                                                              0.9800
                                                                                          Pearson's correlation coefficient




                                                                                                                              0.9775

                                                                                                                              0.9750

                                                                                                                              0.9725

                                                                                                                              0.9700

                                                                                                                              0.9675
                                                                                                                                                                     RBF
                                                                                                                              0.9650                                 MLP-induced NTK
                                                                                                                                                                    100                                                                101


 Figure 13: Pearson’s correlation coefficients with predicted values of the TNTK with different α.


                                                                                                                                                                                     26
F.2.2   Dataset-wise results
For each α, scatter-plots are shown in Figures 11 and 12. As shown in Figure 13, the correlation
coefficients with the TNTK are likely to be higher for the MLP-induced NTK than for the RBF kernel.
Tables 2, 3 and 4 are dataset-wise results of the comparison between the TNTK, the MLP-induced
NTK, and the RBF kernel. For each α, depth is tuned for each dataset. In terms of the depth, the
best performers from 1 to 29 are compared with the TNTK and the MLP-induced NTK. For the RBF
kernel, γ is tuned in each dataset from 30 candidate values as described in Section F.1.2. Therefore,
the number of tunable parameters is the same across all methods. All parameter-wise results are
visualized in Figures 14 and 15.




                                                 27
          name                           size   α=0.5     α=1.0     α=2.0     α=4.0     α=8.0     α=16.0    α=32.0    α=64.0    MLP-NTK    RBF
     0    trains                          10     87.500    87.500   87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    100.000   87.500
     1    balloons                        16     87.500   100.000   93.750    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    100.000   93.750
     2    lenses                          24     87.500    87.500   87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500     87.500   87.500
     3    lung-cancer                     32     56.250    53.125   53.125    53.125    53.125    56.250    59.375    59.375     65.625   53.125
     4    post-operative                  90     63.636    64.773   67.045    69.318    69.318    68.182    68.182    69.318     69.318   56.818
     5    pittsburg-bridges-SPAN          92     55.435    57.609   58.696    67.391    65.217    66.304    66.304    67.391     65.217   58.696
     6    fertility                      100     84.000    88.000   89.000    89.000    89.000    89.000    89.000    89.000     89.000   83.000
     7    zoo                            101    100.000    99.000   99.000    99.000    99.000    99.000    99.000    99.000     99.000   99.000
     8    pittsburg-bridges-T-OR-D       102     81.000    84.000   87.000    89.000    89.000    89.000    88.000    88.000     87.000   89.000
     9    pittsburg-bridges-REL-L        103     67.308    74.038   75.000    74.038    75.962    75.962    75.962    75.962     74.038   74.038
     10   pittsburg-bridges-TYPE         105     57.692    59.615   64.423    66.346    66.346    66.346    66.346    65.385     68.269   59.615
     11   molec-biol-promoter            106     90.385    88.462   87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500    87.500     90.385   88.462
     12   pittsburg-bridges-MATERIAL     106     93.269    94.231   94.231    94.231    94.231    94.231    94.231    94.231     94.231   93.269
     13   breast-tissue                  106     65.385    68.269   67.308    70.192    72.115    72.115    75.000    74.038     69.231   71.154
     14   αcute-nephritis                120    100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000
     15   αcute-inflammation             120    100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000   100.000




28
     16   heart-switzerland              123     37.097    43.548   48.387    47.581    50.000    44.355    44.355    44.355     47.581   37.903
     17   echocardiogram                 131     81.061    81.061   84.848    84.091    85.606    85.606    85.606    85.606     85.606   78.030
     18   lymphography                   148     88.514    88.514   88.514    88.514    87.838    87.162    86.486    86.486     88.514   86.486
     19   iris                           150     95.946    97.973   96.622    88.514    86.486    87.162    87.838    87.162     87.162   96.622
     20   teaching                       151     56.579    57.895   58.553    60.526    64.474    67.105    67.105    67.763     63.158   60.526
     21   hepatitis                      155     83.974    85.256   85.256    84.615    84.615    84.615    84.615    85.256     83.974   85.256
     22   wine                           178     98.864    99.432   98.864    98.864    98.864    98.295    98.295    97.727     99.432   98.295
     23   planning                       182     62.222    65.556   70.000    71.667    71.667    72.222    72.222    72.222     72.222   67.222
     24   flags                          194     52.083    53.646   53.646    53.125    53.646    53.125    53.125    53.125     53.646   49.479
     25   parkinsons                     195     93.878    94.388   92.857    93.367    92.857    92.857    93.367    93.367     93.878   95.408
     26   breast-cancer-wisc-prog        198     82.143    83.673   83.673    83.673    83.673    83.673    83.673    83.673     85.204   78.571
     27   heart-va                       200     31.000    34.000   36.000    36.000    37.500    39.000    40.500    43.000     36.500   29.000
     28   conn-bench-sonar-mines-rocks   208     86.538    86.538   87.019    86.538    86.538    86.538    86.538    86.538     87.981   87.500
     29   seeds                          210     90.865    93.750   93.269    91.827    92.308    92.308    91.827    91.827     96.154   95.673

                                  Table 2: Comparison between TNTK and MLP-induced NTK for a half of the dataset (1/3).
          name                        size   α=0.5    α=1.0    α=2.0    α=4.0    α=8.0    α=16.0   α=32.0   α=64.0   MLP-NTK   RBF
     30   glass                       214    60.849   67.453   70.755   70.755   71.698   71.698   71.226   71.226    70.283   69.811
     31   statlog-heart               270    83.209   87.313   87.687   88.433   88.433   88.433   87.687   87.313    86.567   82.463
     32   breast-cancer               286    64.789   67.254   69.718   70.423   72.887   74.648   75.000   75.000    71.831   65.845
     33   heart-hungarian             294    83.219   83.904   84.247   84.589   85.616   85.274   85.274   85.274    85.616   82.877
     34   heart-cleveland             303    55.263   58.224   58.882   59.211   59.539   58.553   59.211   59.539    57.895   53.618
     35   haberman-survival           306    59.539   61.513   61.842   66.447   68.421   71.711   73.684   73.684    71.053   70.395
     36   vertebral-column-2clases    310    69.805   77.273   78.571   80.844   82.792   84.091   84.091   82.792    83.117   81.494
     37   vertebral-column-3clases    310    71.753   78.247   81.169   80.844   80.844   81.818   81.494   81.169    81.818   81.169
     38   primary-tumor               330    47.561   50.305   52.134   53.049   52.744   50.610   50.305   50.000    52.134   45.427
     39   ecoli                       336    71.429   79.167   83.036   84.524   86.012   86.607   86.905   86.905    85.417   81.250
     40   ionosphere                  351    90.057   91.477   90.341   87.784   88.352   88.352   88.352   88.352    91.761   92.330
     41   libras                      360    82.778   81.389   80.556   80.833   81.111   80.833   80.833   80.833    83.889   85.278
     42   dermatology                 366    97.802   97.802   97.527   97.527   97.253   97.253   97.253   97.253    97.802   97.253
     43   congressional-voting        435    61.697   61.697   61.927   61.927   61.927   61.697   61.697   61.697    61.697   62.156
     44   αrrhythmia                  452    69.469   65.265   64.602   64.823   64.823   64.823   64.823   64.823    71.239   69.248
     45   musk-1                      476    89.076   89.076   89.076   89.286   89.286   89.076   89.076   89.076    89.706   90.756




29
     46   cylinder-bands              512    79.883   78.125   78.125   78.320   78.516   78.320   78.320   78.320    80.273   79.688
     47   low-res-spect               531    91.729   91.353   90.602   89.474   88.534   87.782   87.218   87.218    91.353   90.226
     48   breast-cancer-wisc-diag     569    96.127   96.655   97.359   97.359   97.359   96.831   96.479   96.479    97.007   95.599
     49   ilpd-indian-liver           583    64.897   69.521   70.719   72.260   71.062   71.747   72.603   72.603    71.918   70.377
     50   synthetic-control           600    99.333   99.333   99.167   98.833   98.333   97.833   97.000   96.667    98.833   99.333
     51   balance-scale               625    81.250   84.615   88.782   89.904   91.346   90.064   85.256   85.256    93.269   90.865
     52   statlog-australian-credit   690    59.012   60.610   64.099   66.279   67.151   68.023   68.023   68.023    66.279   59.302
     53   credit-approval             690    82.558   85.174   86.628   87.209   87.645   87.791   87.791   87.355    87.064   81.686
     54   breast-cancer-wisc          699    96.286   97.286   97.857   97.857   98.000   98.000   98.000   98.000    98.000   96.714
     55   blood                       748    67.513   65.775   63.369   69.786   72.727   73.529   75.802   77.005    74.064   78.075
     56   energy-y2                   768    89.583   89.453   88.021   87.891   88.151   87.630   87.630   87.630    88.281   90.755
     57   pima                        768    68.229   70.182   71.354   73.307   76.042   76.302   77.083   76.693    75.000   69.661
     58   energy-y1                   768    93.750   93.620   93.229   90.495   90.234   90.104   90.234   90.234    92.708   96.484
     59   statlog-vehicle             846    78.318   77.014   76.540   73.578   72.986   72.156   72.038   72.038    81.398   77.488

                             Table 3: Comparison between TNTK and MLP-induced NTK for a half of the dataset (2/3).
          name                             size   α=0.5    α=1.0    α=2.0    α=4.0    α=8.0    α=16.0   α=32.0    α=64.0   MLP-NTK    RBF
     60   oocytes_trisopterus_nucleus_2f    912   82.456   82.566   82.456   82.675   80.811   78.728    78.070   77.851    84.978    79.605
     61   oocytes_trisopterus_states_5b     912   92.325   92.982   93.640   93.092   91.667   90.022    89.693   89.693    94.189    91.228
     62   tic-tac-toe                       958   99.268   99.163   99.268   99.268   99.268   99.268    99.268   99.268    98.640   100.000
     63   mammographic                      961   72.708   71.250   72.083   75.625   77.604   78.854    78.958   79.271    80.000    78.750
     64   statlog-german-credit            1000   75.200   76.500   77.800   77.300   76.200   75.500    75.500   75.400    77.500    73.700
     65   led-display                      1000   72.400   72.300   72.600   72.500   72.300   72.500    72.300   72.500    72.900    73.000
     66   oocytes_merluccius_nucleus_4d    1022   81.078   80.588   80.686   80.686   79.412   77.255    76.961   76.765    83.725    75.490
     67   oocytes_merluccius_states_2f     1022   92.353   91.961   92.157   92.157   91.373   90.784    90.784   90.490    93.039    92.059
     68   contrac                          1473   40.082   44.293   47.147   50.068   51.155   52.038    52.514   51.155    50.272    43.207
     69   yeast                            1484   42.588   49.326   54.380   58.154   60.040   60.243    60.445   60.849    59.636    54.380
     70   semeion                          1593   93.719   93.467   93.405   93.467   93.467   93.467    93.467   93.405    96.168    95.603
     71   wine-quality-red                 1599   63.062   65.938   68.812   70.000   70.625   70.375    70.312   70.312    69.625    64.438
     72   plant-texture                    1599   83.812   81.812   79.438   77.938   77.688   77.625    77.750   77.625    86.125    85.625
     73   plant-margin                     1600   84.750   83.938   82.938   81.875   80.750   79.500    78.938   78.563    84.875    83.875
     74   plant-shape                      1600   64.812   63.562   62.438   60.375   58.312   57.062    56.375   55.937    66.250    68.000
     75   car                              1728   97.454   97.569   97.164   96.701   96.354   96.181    96.123   96.123    97.743    98.032




30
     76   steel-plates                     1941   76.289   77.320   77.938   77.423   77.062   76.753    76.598   76.495    78.351    75.103
     77   cardiotocography-3clases         2126   92.232   92.514   92.043   91.902   91.949   91.855    91.996   91.855    93.173    92.043
     78   cardiotocography-10clases        2126   80.838   82.957   82.250   80.744   79.896   79.896    79.661   79.614    84.181    79.143
     79   titanic                          2201   78.955   78.955   78.955   78.955   78.955   78.955    78.955   78.955    78.955    78.955
     80   statlog-image                    2310   96.360   96.967   97.097   96.750   96.231   95.927    95.884   95.624    97.660    96.404
     81   ozone                            2536   97.358   97.240   97.200   97.200   97.200   97.200    97.200   97.200    97.397    97.200
     82   molec-biol-splice                3190   86.731   85.947   84.536   83.093   82.465   82.403    82.371   82.371    86.920    86.418
     83   chess-krvkp                      3196   99.124   98.905   98.655   97.872   96.902   95.526    95.307   95.307    99.406    98.999
     84   αbalone                          4177   50.407   49.880   55.532   60.010   62.548   64.200    64.943   65.086    63.410    64.152
     85   bank                             4521   88.628   89.336   89.358   89.513   89.358   89.159    89.181   89.159    89.735    88.142
     86   spambase                         4601   91.478   91.174   92.435   90.652   93.130   89.630    91.478   93.348    94.913    90.652
     87   wine-quality-white               4898   63.623   66.810   67.545   68.791   69.158   68.975    68.995   68.913    69.097    65.748
     88   waveform-noise                   5000   86.360   86.340   86.520   86.540   86.720   86.500    85.900   85.520    86.540    85.460
     89   waveform                         5000   85.440   85.780   86.300   86.500   86.660   86.700    86.740   86.520    86.340    84.640

                                Table 4: Comparison between TNTK and MLP-induced NTK for a half of the dataset (3/3).
                                   trains                                                balloons                                                          lenses                                                lung-cancer                                        post-operative
              1.0                                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6
   Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                           Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.50
                                                                        0.8
              0.9                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                              0.25
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                        pittsburg-bridges-SPAN                                               fertility                                                      zoo                                    0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                       pittsburg-bridges-T-OR-D                                 pittsburg-bridges-REL-L
                                                                                                                                      1.0
   Accuracy




                                                          Accuracy




                                                                                                                           Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy
                                                                     0.75                                                                                                                          0.8                                                    0.7
              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
              0.5                                                    0.50                                                             0.9                                                          0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                        pittsburg-bridges-TYPE                                     molec-biol-promoter                                 pittsburg-bridges-MATERIAL                                                breast-tissue                                      acute-nephritis
                                                                        0.9                                                                                                                                                                            1.05
   Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                           Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
              0.6                                                                                                                     0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6                                                 1.00
              0.4                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4                                                 0.95
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                          acute-inflammation                                         heart-switzerland                                              echocardiogram                                              lymphography                                                iris
           1.05                                                         0.5                                                        0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.95
Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.85
           1.00                                                         0.4                                                        0.80                                                         0.80                                                   0.90
           0.95                                                                                                                    0.75                                                         0.75                                                   0.85
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                               teaching                                                  hepatitis                                                         wine                                                   planning                                                 flags
   Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Accuracy
                                                                        0.8                                                                                                                                                                            0.50
              0.6                                                                                                                  0.98                                                            0.6
                                                                        0.7                                                                                                                                                                            0.45
              0.5                                                                                                                  0.96                                                            0.4
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                              parkinsons                                          breast-cancer-wisc-prog                                              heart-va                                    conn-bench-sonar-mines-rocks                                            seeds
                                                                        0.8                                                           0.4                                                       0.85
   Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                           Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy
              0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.80                                                      0.9
              0.8
                                                                                                                                      0.3                                                       0.75
              0.7                                                       0.6                                                                                                                                                                               0.8
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                                   glass                                               statlog-heart                                                 breast-cancer                                             heart-hungarian                                      heart-cleveland
              0.7                                                 0.875                                                                                                                         0.85
   Accuracy




                                                       Accuracy




                                                                                                                           Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Accuracy




                                                                                                                                      0.7                                                                                                           0.575
              0.6                                                 0.850                                                                                                                                                                             0.550
                                                                  0.825                                                               0.6                                                       0.80                                                0.525
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                          haberman-survival                                   vertebral-column-2clases                                      vertebral-column-3clases                                           primary-tumor                                               ecoli
              0.7                                                       0.8                                                           0.8
   Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                           Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                0.50                                                      0.8
              0.6                                                       0.7                                                           0.6                                                       0.45                                                      0.7
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth
                             ionosphere                                                       libras                                                 dermatology                                             congressional-voting                                     arrhythmia
              0.9                                                       0.8                                                     0.975                                                                                                                     0.7
   Accuracy




                                                             Accuracy




                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Accuracy




                                                                                                                                0.950                                                        0.600
              0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                        0.6                                                     0.925                                                        0.575
              0.7
                    0         10            20    30                          0         10             20       30                          0         10            20       30                          0        10           20   30                          0     10           20         30
                                   Depth                                                      Depth                                                        Depth                                                       Depth                                               Depth

                               = 0.5              = 1.0                              = 2.0                  = 4.0                           = 8.0                   = 16.0                         = 32.0                 = 64.0               MLP-induced NTK                          RBF


                                                 Figure 14: Dataset-wise comparison for a half of the dataset (1/2).




                                                                                                                                                      31
                            musk-1                                          cylinder-bands                                            low-res-spect                                          breast-cancer-wisc-diag                                   ilpd-indian-liver
              0.9                                                0.8                                                   0.9                                                      0.97                                                       0.7
   Accuracy




                                                      Accuracy




                                                                                                            Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
                                                                 0.7                                                   0.8                                                      0.96
              0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                       0.7                                                      0.95
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth

              1.0
                        synthetic-control                                   balance-scale                                        statlog-australian-credit                                       credit-approval                                      breast-cancer-wisc
                                                                                                                                                                             0.875                                                      0.98
                                                                                                                    0.65
   Accuracy




                                                   Accuracy




                                                                                                         Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy
                                                              0.75                                                                                                           0.850
              0.9                                                                                                   0.60
                                                              0.50                                                                                                           0.825                                                      0.96
                                                                                                                    0.55
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth
                                blood                                         energy-y2                                                     pima                                                   energy-y1                                            statlog-vehicle
                                                              0.90                                                  0.75                                                        0.95                                                       0.8
   Accuracy




                                                   Accuracy




                                                                                                         Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
              0.7                                                                                                   0.70                                                        0.90
                                                              0.85                                                                                                              0.85                                                       0.7
              0.6                                                                                                   0.65
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth
              oocytes_trisopterus_nucleus_2f                      oocytes_trisopterus_states_5b                                         tic-tac-toe                                             mammographic                                         statlog-german-credit
           0.85                                                                                                        1.0                                                         0.8
Accuracy




                                                   Accuracy




                                                                                                            Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy
           0.80                                               0.90                                                                                                                                                                      0.75
                                                              0.85                                                     0.8                                                                                                              0.70
           0.75                                                                                                                                                                    0.7
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth
                          led-display                            oocytes_merluccius_nucleus_4d                          oocytes_merluccius_states_2f                                                contrac                                                    yeast
           0.73                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
Accuracy




                                                   Accuracy




                                                                                                         Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy
           0.72                                               0.80                                                  0.90
           0.71                                               0.75                                                  0.85                                                           0.4                                                     0.4
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth
                            semeion                                        wine-quality-red                                           plant-texture                                               plant-margin                                           plant-shape
                                                                 0.7                                                                                                               0.8
   Accuracy




                                                      Accuracy




                                                                                                            Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy
                                                                                                                       0.8
              0.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.50
                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                       0.6                                                         0.6
              0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.25
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth
                                 car                                          steel-plates                                   cardiotocography-3clases                                    cardiotocography-10clases                      0.79
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               titanic
                                                                                                                       0.9
   Accuracy




                                                   Accuracy




                                                                                                            Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                        Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Accuracy



              0.9                                             0.75                                                                                                                 0.8
              0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.78
                                                              0.70                                                     0.8
              0.7                                             0.65                                                                                                                 0.7                                                  0.77
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth
                         statlog-image                                             ozone                                            molec-biol-splice                                             chess-krvkp                                              abalone
Accuracy




                                                   Accuracy




                                                                                                            Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                  Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Accuracy




           0.95                                                                                                        0.8                                                   0.975                                                         0.6
           0.90                                               0.75                                                                                                           0.950
                                                                                                                                                                             0.925                                                         0.5
           0.85                                               0.50                                                     0.6
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth

              0.9
                                bank                                           spambase                                0.7
                                                                                                                                   wine-quality-white                                           waveform-noise                                            waveform
   Accuracy




                                                      Accuracy




                                                                                                            Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                     Accuracy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accuracy




                                                                 0.9                                                                                                            0.85
              0.8                                                                                                      0.6                                                                                                           0.850
                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                       0.5
              0.7                                                0.7                                                                                                            0.80                                                 0.825
                    0      10           20    30                       0      10           20       30                       0         10           20       30                          0         10           20   30                          0        10             20         30
                                Depth                                              Depth                                                    Depth                                                       Depth                                                  Depth

                            = 0.5             = 1.0                        = 2.0                = 4.0                        = 8.0                  = 16.0                         = 32.0                  = 64.0               MLP-induced NTK                               RBF


                                             Figure 15: Dataset-wise comparison for a half of the dataset (2/2).




                                                                                                                                        32
