                                        Characterizing the Optimal 0 − 1 Loss for Multi-class
                                              Classification with a Test-time Attacker


                                                    Sihui Dai1∗ Wenxin Ding2∗ Arjun Nitin Bhagoji2 Daniel Cullina3
                                                               Ben Y. Zhao2 Haitao Zheng2 Prateek Mittal1
                                                 1
                                                   Princeton University 2 University of Chicago 3 Pennsylvania State University
                                                                       {sihuid,pmittal}@princeton.edu
arXiv:2302.10722v2 [cs.LG] 6 Dec 2023




                                                                      {wenxind, abhagoji}@uchicago.edu
                                                                   {ravenben, htzheng}@cs.uchicago.edu
                                                                              cullina@psu.edu



                                                                                      Abstract
                                                 Finding classifiers robust to adversarial examples is critical for their safe deploy-
                                                 ment. Determining the robustness of the best possible classifier under a given threat
                                                 model for a fixed data distribution and comparing it to that achieved by state-of-
                                                 the-art training methods is thus an important diagnostic tool. In this paper, we find
                                                 achievable information-theoretic lower bounds on robust loss in the presence of a
                                                 test-time attacker for multi-class classifiers on any discrete dataset. We provide
                                                 a general framework for finding the optimal 0 − 1 loss that revolves around the
                                                 construction of a conflict hypergraph from the data and adversarial constraints.
                                                 The prohibitive cost of this formulation in practice leads us to formulate other
                                                 variants of the attacker-classifier game that more efficiently determine the range of
                                                 the optimal loss. Our valuation shows, for the first time, an analysis of the gap to
                                                 optimal robustness for classifiers in the multi-class setting on benchmark datasets.


                                        1   Introduction
                                        Developing a theoretical understanding of the vulnerability of classifiers to adversarial examples
                                        (27; 12; 8; 4) generated by a test-time attacker is critical to their safe deployment. Past work has
                                        largely taken one of two approaches. The first has focused on generalization bounds on learning in
                                        the presence of adversarial examples, by trying to determine the sample complexity of robust learning
                                        (10; 25; 21). The second has been to characterize the lowest possible loss achievable within a specific
                                        hypothesis class (22; 5; 6) for binary classification for a specified data distribution and attacker. The
                                        hypothesis class of choice is often the set of all possible classification functions. The optimal loss
                                        thus determined is a lower bound on robustness for classifiers used in practice, allowing practitioners
                                        to measure progress for defenses and step away from the attack-defense arms race (19; 31; 9).
                                        In this paper, we take on the second approach and propose methods to find the lowest possible
                                        loss attainable by any measurable classifier in the presence of a test-time attacker in the multi-class
                                        setting. The loss thus obtained is referred to as the optimal loss and the corresponding classifier,
                                        the optimal classifier. We extend previous work (5; 6) which was restricted to the binary setting,
                                        allowing us to compare the robustness of multi-class classifiers used in practice to the optimal loss.
                                        Our first contribution is thus extending the conflict-graph framework for computing lower bounds
                                        on robustness to the multi-class setting. In this framework, given a dataset and attacker, we construct
                                        a conflict hypergraph which contains vertices representing training examples in the dataset, and
                                        hyperedges representing overlaps between adversarial neighborhoods around each training example.
                                        Using this hypergraph, we construct a linear program whose optimal value is a lower bound on
                                        the 0 − 1 loss for all classifiers and whose solution is the optimal classifier. The lower bound on
                                        robustness is thus achievable.

                                        37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
In practice, however, we find that the full multi-class formulation of the lower bound, although exact,
can lead to prohibitively large optimization problems. Thus, we vary the information available to
either the attacker or classifier to find alternative lower bounds that are quicker to compute. Our
second contribution is the development and analysis of more efficient methods to determine the
range of loss obtained by the optimal classifier. (see Table 1). We also interpret these methods as
classifier-attacker games. In particular, we find lower bounds on the optimal loss by aggregating the
set of all binary classifier-only lower bounds as well as by using truncated hypergraphs (hypergraphs
with a restriction on the maximum hyperedge degree). We also upper bound the optimal loss with
a generalization of the Caro-Wei bound (1) on a graph’s independent set size. The gap between
the lower and upper bounds on the optimal loss allows us to determine the range within which the
optimal loss lies.
To analyze the performance of classifiers obtained from adversarial training (19; 31), we compare the
loss obtained through adversarial training to that of the optimal classifier. We find a loss differential
that is greatly exacerbated compared to the binary case (5; 22). In addition, we also determine the
cases where, in practice, the bounds obtained from game variants are close to the optimal. We find
that while the aggregation of binary classifier-only bounds leads to a very loose lower bound, the use
of truncated hyperedges can significantly speed up computation while achieving a loss value close to
optimal. This is validated using the Caro-Wei upper bound, with the lower and upper bounds on the
optimal loss closely matching for adversarial budgets used in practice. Thus, our final contribution
is an extensive empirical analysis of the behavior of the optimal loss for a given attacker, along with
its lower and upper bounds. This enables practitioners to utilize our methods even when the optimal
loss is computationally challenging to determine.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: §2 provides the characterization of the optimal loss; §3
proposes several upper and lower bounds on the optimal loss; §4 computes and compares the optimal
loss to these bounds, as well as the performance of robustly trained classifiers and §5 concludes with
a discussion of limitations and future work.


2     Characterizing Optimal 0-1 Loss

In this section, we characterize the optimal 0 − 1 loss for any discrete distribution (e.g. training set)
in the presence of a test-time attacker. This loss can be computed as the solution of a linear program
(LP), which is defined based on a hypergraph constructed from the classification problem and attacker
constraint specification. The solution to the LP can be used to construct a classifier achieving the
optimal loss, and lower bounds the loss attainable by any particular learned classifier.


2.1   Problem Formulation

Notation. We consider a classification problem where inputs are sampled from input space X , and
labels belong to K classes: y ∈ Y = [K] = {1, ..., K}. Let P be the joint probability over X × Y.
Let Hsoft denote the space of all soft classifiers; i.e. specifically, for all h ∈ Hsoft we have that
                      PK
h : X → [0, 1]K and i=1 h(x)i = 1 for all x ∈ X . Here, h(x)i represents the probability that the
input x belongs to the ith class. We use the natural extension of 0 − 1 loss to soft classifiers as our
loss function: ℓ(h, (x, y)) = 1 − h(x)y . This reduces to 0 − 1 loss when h(x) ∈ {0, 1}K . 1
The adversarial classification game. We are interested in the setting where there exists a test-time
attacker that can modify any data point x to generate an adversarial example x̃ from the neighborhood
N (x) of x. An instance of the game is specified by a discrete probability distribution P ,2 hypothesis
class H ⊆ Hsoft , and neighborhood function N . We require that for all x ∈ X , N (x) always contains
x. The goal of the classifier player is to minimize expected classification loss and the goal of the

    1
      A soft classifier can be interpreted as a randomized hard-decision classifier f with Pr[f (x) = y] = h(x̃)y ,
in which case ℓ(h, (x, y)) = Pr[f (x) ̸= y], classification error probability of this randomized classifier.
    2
      Properly extending this game to more general data distributions is tricky due to issues with the measurability
of the supremum of the loss. See Pydi and Jog for discussion of the multiple approaches taken in the literature and
when various versions of the game are equivalent (23). These technicalities do not arise for discrete distributions,
which are sufficient for our purposes.


                                                         2
attacker is to maximize it. The optimal loss is
                                  h              i                   h                               i
    L∗ (P, N, H) = inf E(x,y)∼P sup ℓ(h, (x̃, y)) = 1 − sup E(x,y)∼P   inf                     h(x̃)y .   (1)
                        h∈H            x̃∈N (x)                    h∈H              x̃∈N (x)


Alternative hypothesis classes. In general, for H′ ⊆ H, we have L∗ (P, N, H) ≤ L∗ (P, N, H′ ).
Two particular cases of this are relevant. First, the class of hard-decision classifiers is a subset of
the class of soft classifiers (Hsoft ). Second, for any fixed model parameterization (ie. fixed NN
architecture), the class of functions represented by that parameterization is another subset. Thus,
optimal loss over Hsoft provides a lower bound on loss for these settings.

2.2       Optimal loss for distributions with finite support

Since we would like to compute the optimal loss for distributions P with finite support, we can
rewrite the expectation in Equation 1 as an inner product. Let V be the support of P , i.e. the set
of points (x, y) ∈ X × Y that have positive probability in P . Let p ∈ [0, 1]V be the probability
mass vector for P : pv = P ({v}). For a soft classifier h, let qN (h) ∈ RV be the vector of robustly
correct classification probabilities for vertices v = (x, y) ∈ V , i.e. qN (h)v := inf x̃∈N (x) h(x̃)y .
Rewriting (1) with our new notation, we have 1 − L∗ (P, Hsoft , N ) = suph∈Hsoft pT qN (h). This is
the maximization of a linear function over all possible vectors qN (h). In fact, the convex hull of
all correct classification probability vectors is a polytope and this optimization problem is a linear
program, as described next.
Definition 1. For a soft classifier h, the correct-classification probability achieved on an example
v = (x, y) in the presence of an adversary with constraint N is qN (h)v = inf x̃∈N (x) h(x̃)y .
The space of achievable correct classification probabilities is PV,N,H ⊆ [0, 1]V , defined as
                                               [ Y
                                  PV,N,H =            [0, qN (h)v ]
                                                  h∈H v∈V

In other words we say that q ′ ∈ [0, 1]V is achievable when there exists h ∈ H such that q ′ ≤ qN (h).
The inequality appears because we will always take nonnegative linear combinations of correct
classification probabilities.
Characterizing PV,N,H allows the minimum adversarial loss achievable to be expressed as an opti-
mization problem with a linear objective:3
             1 − L∗ (P, N, Hsoft ) = sup Ev∼P [qN (h)v ] = sup pT qN (h) =           sup       pT q.      (2)
                                    h∈Hsoft                  h∈Hsoft              q∈PV,N,H

(6) characterized PV,N,Hsof t in the two-class case and demonstrated that this space can be captured
by linear inequalities. We now demonstrate that this also holds for the multi-class setting.

2.3       Linear Program to obtain Optimal Loss

In order to characterize PV,N,Hsof t , we represent the structure of the classification problem with a
conflict hypergraph GV,N = (V, E), which records intersections between neighborhoods of points
in X . The set of vertices V of GV,N is the support of P . E denotes the set of hyperedges of the
graph. For a set S ⊆ V, S ∈ E (i.e. S is a hyperedge in GV,NT  ) if all vertices in S belong to different
classes and the neighborhoods of all vertices in S overlap: (x,y)∈S N (x) ̸= ∅. Thus, the size of
each hyperedge is at most K, E is downward-closed (meaning if e ∈ E and e′ ⊂ e, then e′ ⊂ E), and
every v ∈ V is a degree 1 hyperedge.
Using the conflict hypergraph GV,N , we can now describe PV,N,Hsof t .
Lemma 1 (Feasible output probabilities (Adapted from (6))). The set of correct classification
probability vectors for support points V, adversarial constraint N , and hypothesis class Hsof t is
                                PV,N,Hsof t = {q ∈ RV : q ≥ 0, Bq ≤ 1}                                    (3)
                 E×V
where B ∈ R            is the hyperedge incidence matrix of the conflict hypergraph GV,N .
      3
    For any loss function that is a decreasing function of h(x̃)y , the optimal loss can be specified as an
optimization over PV,N,H . In fact (6) focused on cross-entropy loss, which has this property.


                                                     3
                                                Summary of Method                                Location
    Optimal 0-1 loss                            LP on conflict hypergraph                        §2.3
                                                LP on truncated conflict hypergraph              §3.1
    Lower bounds for optimal 0-1 loss
                                                Combining binary classification bounds           §3.2
    Upper bound for optimal 0-1 loss            Generalization of Caro-Wei bound                 §3.5
Table 1: Summary of methods for computing the optimal 0 − 1 loss and efficient bounds on this
value.

See Supplementary §A for proof. This characterization of PV,N,Hsof t allows us to express optimal
loss as a linear program for any dataset and attacker using Eq. 2 4 .
Corollary 1 (Optimal loss as an LP). For any distribution P with finite support,
                          1 − L∗ (P, N, Hsoft ) = max pT q s.t q ≥ 0, Bq ≤ 1.                               (4)
                                                      q


Duality and adversarial strategies. The dual linear program is
                                   min 1T z    s.t.   z ≥ 0,    B T z ≥ p.
                                    z

Feasible points in the dual linear program are fractional coverings of the vertices by the hyperedges
(24). (See Section 3.4 and Supplementary §B for more discussion of fractional packings and
coverings.) An adversarial strategy can be constructed from a feasible point z as follows. For each
hyperedge e, chose an example x̃(e) such that x̃(e) ∈ N (x) for all (x, y) ∈ e. From the definition
of the conflict hypergraph, a choice is always available. A randomized adversarial strategy consists
of conditional distributions for the adversarial example x̃ given the natural example x. When the
adversary samples the natural example (x, y), the adversary can select x̃(e) with probability at
       B ze
least e,vpv . Note that Be,v ze is the amount of coverage of v coming from e. This is nonzero
only  for e that contain (x, y). A conditional distribution satisfying these inequalities exists because
                   T
P
   e Be,v ze = (B z)v ≥ pv .

Thus for a vertex v such that (B T z)v = pv , there is only one choice for this distribution. For a vertex
v that is over-covered, i.e. (B T z)v > pv , the adversary has some flexibility. If v is over-covered in
some minimal cost covering, by complementary slackness qv = 0 in every optimal q, so the optimal
classifiers do not attempt to classify v correctly.

Three-class minimal examples. Corollary 1
demonstrates that the optimal loss for the multi-
                                                          V                          V′
class problem is influenced by hyperedges be-
                                                                     u                           u′
tween vertices which reflect higher order inter-
actions between examples. Figure 1 shows an
important distinction between two types of three-
way interactions of examples.
                                                               w           v                w′        v′
We        have          L∗ (P, Hsof t , N )      =
                      1          ∗     ′
max(pu , pv , pw , 2 ) while L (P , Hsof t , N ) =
max(p′u , p′v , p′w ). The presence or absence of     Figure 1: Two possible conflict structures involv-
the size-three hyperedge affects the optimal loss     ing three examples, each from a different class. In
if and only if the example probabilities are close    the right case, all subsets of V ′ = {u′ , v ′ , w′ } are
to balanced, i.e. all at most 12 .                    hyperedges in the conflict hypergraph GV ′ ,N . In
                                                      the left case, {u, v, w} is not a hyperedge in GV,N ,
It is instructive to consider the optimal classifiers but all other subsets of V are.
and adversarial strategies in the two cases. For
V, when 12 ≤ pu , the classifier h with qN (h) =
(1, 0, 0) is optimal. One such classifier is the
constant classifier h(x) = (1, 0, 0). The optimal cover satisfies z{u,v} + z{u,w} = pu , z{u,v} ≥ pv ,
z{u,w} ≥ pw , z{v,w} = 0. Thus when the adversary samples v or w, it always produces an
    4
      We note that concurrent work by Trillos et al. (29) provides a general-purpose framework based on optimal
transport to find lower bounds on robustness in the per-sample as well as distributional sense. They also
independently construct the three-class minimal example from Figure 1.


                                                      4
adversarial example that could be confused for u. When max(pu , pv , pw ) ≤ 21 , any classifier h
with qN (h) = ( 12 , 12 , 12 ) is optimal. To achieve these correct classification probabilities, we need
h(x̃) = ( 12 , 12 , 0) for x̃ ∈ N (u) ∩ N (v), h(x̃) = ( 21 , 0, 12 ) for x̃ ∈ N (u) ∩ N (w), etc.. The cover
z{u,v} = pu + pv − 12 , z{u,w} = pu + pw − 12 , and z{v,w} = pv + pw − 12 is optimal and has cost 12 .
The adversary produces examples associated with all three edges.
For V ′ , things are simpler. The cover z{u,v,w} = max(pu , pv , pw ) is always optimal. When
pu ≥ max(pv , pw ), the classifier that returns (1, 0, 0) everywhere is optimal.

3     Bounding the Optimal 0-1 Loss
While Corollary 1 characterizes the optimal loss, it may be computationally expensive to construct
conflict hypergraphs in practice for a given dataset and to solve the linear program. Thus, we discuss
several methods of bounding the optimal loss from the LP in Corollary 1, which are computationally
faster in practice (§4.2).

3.1   Lower bounds on multiclass optimal loss via truncated hypergraphs
                                                              Q
The edge set of the hypergraph G can be very large: there are i∈[K] (1 + |Vi |) vertex sets that are
potential hyperedges. Even when the size of the edge set is reasonable, it is not clear that higher
order hyperedges can be computed from V efficiently. To work around these issues, we consider
hypergraphs with bounded size hyperedges: G ≤m = (V, E ≤m ) where E ≤m = {e ∈ E : |e| ≤ m}.
We refer to these hypergraphs as truncated hypergraphs. In the corresponding relaxation of (4), B is
replaced by B ≤m , the incidence matrix for E ≤m . Since E ≤m ⊆ E, this relaxation provides a lower
bound on L∗ (P, N, Hsoft ).

Classification with side-information. This relaxation has an interpretation as the optimal loss in a
variation of the classification game with side information.
Definition 2. In the example-dependent side information game with list length m, the adversary
samples (x, y) ∼ P , then selects x̃ and C ⊆ Y such that y ∈ C and |C| = m. We call C the side
                                                                                             Y
information. The classifier receives both x̃ and C, so the classifier is a function h : X × m  → [0, 1]K ,
        Y
          
where m is the set of m-element subsets of Y. Let
                                                   h                                       i
                L∗ (m, P, H, N ) = inf E(x,y)∼P         inf      min (1 − h(x̃, C)y )
                                    h∈H              x̃∈N (x) C∈( Y ):y∈C
                                                                  m

be the minimum loss in this game.
To illustrate this, consider the distribution P ′ from Figure 1 with m = 2. The adversary can select
some x̃ ∈ N (u′ ) ∩ N (v ′ ) ∩ N (w′ ), but the classifier will use the side-information to eliminate one
of the three classes. The classifier is in the same situation it would be if the distribution were P and
the size-three hyperedge was absent.
Definition 3. For classifiers using class list side-information, the correct-classification probability
is defined as follows: qm,N (h)(x,y) = inf x̃∈N (x) minC∈([K]):y∈C h(x̃, C)y . The set of achievable
                                                        S      Qm
correct-classification probabilities is Pm,V,N,H = h∈H v∈V [0, qm,N (h)v ].

When m = K, the minimization over C is trivial and qm,N (h) reduces to qN (h).
Lemma 2 (Feasible output probabilities in the side-information game). The set of correct classifica-
tion probability vectors for side-information of size m, support points V, adversarial constraint N ,
and hypothesis class Hsof t is
                           Pm,V,N,Hsof t = {q ∈ RV : q ≥ 0, B ≤m q ≤ 1}                                  (5)
where B ≤m ∈ RE×V is the hyperedge incidence matrix of the conflict hypergraph G≤m
                                                                                V,N .

The proof can be found in Supplementary §A.
Using the feasible correct classification probabilities in Lemma 2, we can now write the LP for
obtaining the optimal loss for classification with side-information:


                                                     5
Corollary 2 (Optimal loss for classification with side information / truncation lower bound).
                      1 − L∗ (P, N, Hsoft ) = max pT q s.t q ≥ 0, B ≤m q ≤ 1.
                                                 q


3.2   Lower bounds on multiclass optimal loss via lower bounds for binary classification

For large training datasets and large perturbation sizes, it may still be computationally expensive to
compute lower bounds via LP even when using truncated hypergraphs due to the large number of
edge constraints. Prior works (5; 6) proposed methods of computing lower bounds for 0 − 1 loss for
binary classification problems and demonstrate that their algorithm is more efficient than generic LP
solvers. We now ask the question: Can we use lower bounds for binary classification problems to
efficiently compute a lower bound for multi-class classification?

                                       optimal 0−1 loss for all one-versus-one binary classification
Consider the setting where we obtain the
tasks. Specifically, for each C ∈ [K]
                                    2 , the binary classification task for that class pair uses example
distribution P |Y ∈ C and the corresponding optimal loss is L∗ ((P |Y ∈ C), N, Hsof t ). What can
we say about L∗ (P, N, Hsof t ) given these K2 numbers?
This question turns about to be related to another variation of classification with side information.
Definition 4. In the class-only side-information game, the adversary samples y ∼ Py , then selects
C ∈ [K]                                                        ∗
          
        m , then samples x ∼ Px|y and selects x̃ ∈ N (x). Let Lco (m, P, H, N ) be the minimum loss
in this game.

In the example-dependent side-information game from Section 3.1, the adversary’s choice of C can
depend on both x and y. In the class-only variation it can only depend on y. For the class only game,
we will focus on the m = 2 case.
To make the connection to the binary games, we need to add one more restriction on the adversary’s
choice of side information: for all y, y ′ Pr[C = {y, y ′ }|Y = y] = Pr[C = {y, y ′ }|Y = y ′ ]. This
ensures that the classifier’s posterior for Y given C is Pr[Y = y|C] = Pr[Y = y]/ Pr[Y ∈ C].
Lemma
    P 3. The optimal loss in the class-only        side-information game is L∗co (2, P, N, H) =
                                               ∗
maxs i,j P r[Y = i]ai,j si,j where ai,j = L (P |(y ∈ {i, j}), H, N ) and s ∈ R[K]×[K] is a
symmetric doubly stochastic matrix: s ≥ 0, s = sT , s1 = 1.

The proof in is Supplementary §A. The variable s represents the attacker’s strategy for selecting the
class side information. When the classes are equally likely, we have a maximum weight coupling
problem: because the weights a are symmetric, the constraint that s be symmetric becomes irrelevant.

3.3   Relationships between games and bounds

The side information games provide a collection of lower bounds on L∗ (P, N, Hsoft ). When m = 1,
the side infomation game becomes trivial: C = {y} and the side information contains the answer
to the classification problem. Thus L∗ (1, Hsof t ) = L∗co (1, Hsof t ) = 0. When m = K, C = Y and
both the example-dependent and class-only side information games are equivalent to the original game,
so L∗ (P, N, H) = L∗ (K, P, N, H) = L∗co (K, P, N, H). For each variation of the side-information
game, the game becomes more favorable for the adversary as m increases: L∗ (m, P, n, H) ≤
L∗ (m + 1, P, N, H) and L∗co (m, P, N, H) ≤ L∗co (m + 1, P, N, H). For each m, it is more favorable
for the adversary to see x before selecting C, i.e. L∗co (m, P, N, H) ≤ L∗ (m, P, N, H).

3.4   Optimal Loss for Hard Classifiers

Since Hhard ⊂ Hsoft , L∗ (m, P, N, Hsoft ) ≤ L∗ (P, N, Hhard ). The optimal loss over hard classifiers is
interesting both as a bound on the optimal loss over soft classifiers and as an independent quantity.
Upper bounds on L∗ (P, N, Hhard ) can be combined with lower bounds from §3.1 and §3.2 using
small values of m to pin down L∗ (m, P, N, Hsoft ) and establish that larger choices of m would not
provide much additional information.
A hard classifier h : X → {0, 1}[K] has 0, 1-valued correct classification probabilities. When we
apply the classifier construction procedure from the proof of Lemma 1 using an integer-valued q


                                                     6
vector, we obtain a hard classifier. Thus the possible correct classification probabilities for hard
classifiers are PV,N,Hsof t ∩ {0, 1}[K] . These are exactly the indicator vectors for the independent
sets in G ≤2 : the vertices included in the independent set are classified correctly and the remainder are
not. Formally, we can express hard classifier loss as:
                         1 − L∗ (P, N, Hhard ) =            max                P (S).                  (6)
                                                   S⊆V:S independent in G ≤2

Finding the maximum weight independent set is an NP hard problem, which makes it computationally
inefficient to compute optimal hard classifier loss.

Two-class versus Multi-class hard classification There are a number of related but distinct
polytopes associated with the vertices of a hypergraph (24). The distinctions between these concepts
explain some key differences between two-class and multi-class adversarial classification. See
Supplementary §B for full definitions of these polytopes.
When K = 2, the conflict hypergraph is P  a bipartite graph. For bipartite graphs, the fractional vertex
packing polytope, which has a constraint i∈e qi ≤ 1 for each edge e, coincides with the independent
set polytope, which is the convex hull of the independent set indicators. Due to this, in the two class
setting, PV,N,Hsof t is the convex hull of PV,N,Hhard , hard classifiers achieve the optimal loss, and
optimal hard classifiers can be found efficiently.
As seen in Lemma 1, for all K the fractional vertex packing polytope characterizes performance
in soft classification problem. However, for K > 2, it becomes distinct from the independent set
polytope. An independent set in a hypergraph is a subset of vertices that induces no hyperedges. In
other words, in each hyperedge of size m, at most m − 1 vertices can be included in any independent
set. Because the edge set of the conflict hypergraph is downward-closed, only the size-two hyperedges
provide binding constraints: the independent sets in G are the same as the independent sets in G ≤2 .
Thus the concept of a hypergraph independent set is not truly relevant for our application.
There is aP  third related polytope: the fractional independent set polytope of G ≤2 , which has a
constraint i∈S qi ≤ 1 for each clique S in G ≤2 . The fractional independent set polytope of G ≤2 is
contained in the fractional vertex packing polytope of G: every hyperedge in G produces a clique
in G ≤2 but not the reverse. This inclusion could be used to find an upper bound on optimal soft
classification loss.
Furthermore, when K > 2 the fractional vertex packing polytope of the conflict hypergraph, i.e.
PV,N,Hsof t , can have non-integral extreme points and thus can be strictly larger than the independent
set polytope. The first configuration in Figure 1 illustrates this. Thus the soft and hard classifi-
cation problems involve optimization over different spaces of correct classification probabilities.
Furthermore, maximum weight or even approximately maximum weight independent sets cannot be
efficiently found in general graphs: the independent set polytope is not easy to optimize over.
In Section 3.5, we will use an efficiently computable lower bound on graph independence number.

3.5   Upper bounds on hard classifier loss via Caro-Wei bound on independent set probability

In §3.1 and 3.2, we discussed 2 ways of obtaining lower bounds for the loss of soft classifiers
for the multi-class classification problem. In this section, we provide an upper bound on the loss
of the optimal hard classifier (we note that this is also an upper bound for optimal loss for soft
classifiers). In §3.4, we discussed the relationship between optimal loss achievable by hard classifiers
and independent set size. We upper bound the optimal loss of hard classifiers by providing a lower
bound on the probability of independent set in the conflict graph.
The following lemma is a generalization of the Caro-Wei theorem (1) and gives a lower bound on the
weight of the maximum weight independent set.
Lemma 4. Let G be a graph on V with adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}V×V and let P be a probability
distribution on V. For any w ∈ RV , w ≥ 0, there is some independent set S ⊆ V with
                                             X         pv wv
                                P (S) ≥                         .
                                                    ((A + I)w)v
                                            v∈V:wv >0


The proof is in Supplementary §A.


                                                    7
       0.8                                                              0.8
                   L * (2)
       0.6         L * (3)                                              0.6

0-1 loss




                                                                 0-1 loss
                   AT
       0.4                                                              0.4                               L * (2)
       0.2                                                              0.2                               L * (3)
                                                                                                          AT
       0.0 2.0      2.5      3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5   5.0                0.0 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0


                     (a) MNIST (1,4,7)                                           (b) CIFAR-10 (0,2,8)
Figure 2: Optimal error for MNIST and CIFAR-10 3-class problems (L∗ (3)). L∗ (2) is a lower bound
computed using only constraints from edges. AT is the loss for an adversarially trained classifier
under the strong APGD attack (9).

For comparison, the standard version of the Caro-Wei theorem is a simple lower bound
                                                                                  P on the indepen-
dence number of a graph. It states that G contains an independent set S with |S| ≥ v∈V 1/(dv + 1)
where dv is the degree of vertex v.
Note that if w is the indicator vector for an independent set S ′ , the bound becomes pT w = P (S ′ ). In
general, the proof of Lemma 4 can be thought of as a randomized procedure for rounding an arbitrary
vector into an independent set indicator vector. Vectors w that are nearly independent set indicators
yield better bounds.
Lemma 4 provides a lower bound on the size of the maximum independent set in G ≤2 and thus an
upper bound on L∗ (P, n, Hhard ), which we call LCW = 1 − P (S).


4          Empirical Results

In this section, we compute optimal losses in the presence of an ℓ2 -constrained attacker (12) at various
strengths ϵ for benchmark computer vision datasets like MNIST and CIFAR-10 in a 3-class setting.
We compare these optimal losses to those obtained by state-of-the-art adversarially trained classifiers,
showing a large gap. We then compare the optimal loss in the 10-class setting to its upper and lower
bounds (§3.3), showing matching bounds at lower ϵ. In the Supplementary, §C describes hyperedge
finding in practice, §D details the experimental setup and §E contains additional results.


4.1         Optimal loss for 3-class problems

Corollary 1 allows us to compute the optimal loss given any dataset (and its corresponding conflict
hypergraph). We compute the optimal loss for 3-way classification, due to the computational
complexity of finding higher order hyperedges (see §D.4 of the Supp.). In Figure 2, we plot the
optimal loss L∗ (3) computed via the LP in Corollary 1 against the loss obtained through TRADES
(31) for 3-class MNIST (classes ‘1’, ‘4’, ‘7’) and 3-class CIFAR-10 (‘plane’, ‘bird’ and ‘ship’ classes)
with 1000 samples per class 5 . For MNIST, we train a 3 layer CNN for 20 epochs with TRADES
regularization strength β = 1, and for CIFAR-10, we train a WRN-28-10 model for 100 epochs with
β = 6. We evaluate models using APGD-CE from AutoAttack (9).
From Figure 2, we observe that this gap is quite large even at lower values of ϵ. This indicates that
there is considerable progress to be made for current robust training methods, and this gap may be
due to either the expressiveness of the hypothesis class or problems with optimization. We find that
for CIFAR-10, TRADES is unable to achieve loss much better than 0.6 at an ϵ for which the optimal
loss is near 0. This gap is much larger than observed by prior work (5; 6) for binary classification,
suggesting that current robust training techniques struggle more to fit training data with more classes.
In §D.8 of the Supp., we ablate over larger architectures, finding only small improvements at lower
values of ϵ and none at higher.

      5
           We also used PGD adversarial training (19) but found its performance to be worse (See Appendix D.6)


                                                           8
                                L * (2)         L * (3)         L * (4)          Lco* (2)           LCW           AT
       1.00                                                                      1.00
       0.75
0-1 loss                                                                         0.75




                                                                          0-1 loss
       0.50                                                                      0.50
       0.25                                                                      0.25
       0.00                                                                      0.00
              2.0   2.5   3.0      3.5    4.0     4.5     5.0                           2.0   2.5   3.0   3.5   4.0    4.5   5.0   5.5   6.0


                          (a) MNIST                                                                  (b) CIFAR-10
 Figure 3: Lower bounds on the exact optimal 10-class loss using hyperedges up to degree 2 (L∗ (2)),
 3 (L∗ (3)) and 4 (L∗ (4)), as well as maximum weight coupling of pairs of binary 0 − 1 loss lower
 bounds (L∗co (2)). LCW is an upper bound from the Caro-Wei approximation of the independent set
 number. The region in grey represents the range of values we would expect the true optimal loss
 L∗ (10) to fall under.

 4.2          Bounds on optimal loss for 10-class problems

 As the number of classes and dataset size increases, the difficulty of solving the LP in Corollary 1
 increases to the point of computational infeasibility (see §D.4 of the Supp.). We use the methods
 discussed in Section 3 to bound the optimal loss for 10-class problems on MNIST and CIFAR-10
 datasets on the full training dataset. We present results for each approximation in Figure 3, with the
 limitation that for some methods, we are only able to obtain results for smaller values of ϵ due to
 runtime blowup. We provide truncated hypergraph bounds for CIFAR-100 in §D.2 of the Supp.
 Lower bounding the optimal loss using truncated hypergraphs (§3.1): In Figure 3, we plot the
 loss lower bound obtained via by truncating the hypergraph to consider only edges (L∗ (2)), up to
 degree 3 hyperedges (L∗ (3)), and up to degree 4 hyperedges (L∗ (4)). Computing the optimal loss
 would require computing degree 10 hyperedges. However, we find at small values of ϵ, there is little
 difference in these bounds despite the presence of many higher degree hyperedges. This indicates
 that the use of use of higher degree hyperedges may not be critical to get a reasonable estimate of
 the optimal loss. For example, for CIFAR-10 at ϵ = 3, we observe 3M degree 3 hyperedges and
 10M degree 4 hyperedges, but these constraints have no impact on the computed lower bound. To
 understand the impact of hyperedges, we provide the count of hyperedges for each value of ϵ and
 plots of the distribution of optimal classification probabilities per vertex in §D.3 of the Supp. From
 Figure 2, we find that the difference L∗ (2) and L∗ (3) does not occur until the loss reaches above 0.4
 for the 3-class problem.
 Takeaway: In practice, we do not lose information from computing lower bounds with only edges in
 the conflict hypergraph.
 Lower bounding the optimal loss using the 1v1 binary classification problems (§3.2): We can
 use the algorithm from Bhagoji et al.(6) to efficiently compute 1v1 pairwise optimal losses to find
 a lower bound on the 10-class optimal loss (L∗CO (2)). From Lemma 3, we use maximum weight
 coupling over these optimal losses to find a lower bound. Optimal loss heatmaps for each pair of
 classes in MNIST and CIFAR-10 are in §D.5 of the Supp. The efficiency of the 1v1 computation
 allows us to compute lower bounds at larger values of ϵ in Figure 3.
 Takeaway: From Figure 3, we find that while this lower bound is the most efficient to compute, the
 obtained bound is much looser compared to that from truncated hypergraphs. This arises from the
 weak attacker assumed while computing this bound.
 Upper bounding optimal loss via Caro-Wei approximation (§3.5): In Figure 3, we also plot the
 upper bound on 0 − 1 loss for hard classifiers (denoted by LCW ) obtained via applying Lemma 4
 with vertex weights obtained from the solution to L∗ (2). When ϵ becomes large (ϵ ≥ 3.0 for MNIST
 and ϵ ≥ 4.5 for CIFAR-10), the loss upper bound increases sharply. This indicates the lower bound
 on the independent set size becomes looser as the number of edges increases, due to the importance
 of higher-order interactions that are not captured by the approximation. At the small values of ϵ used
 in practice however, the lower bounds obtained through truncated hypergraphs (L∗ (2), L∗ (3), and
 L∗ (4)) are close to the value of this upper bound .


                                                                      9
Takeaways: (i) We do not not lose much information from not including all hyperedges at small ϵ
values as the upper and lower bounds are almost tight; (ii) At these small values of ϵ, we do not
expect much difference in performance between hard classifiers and soft classifiers.
Comparing loss of trained classifiers to optimal: In Figure 3, we also compare the loss obtained by
a robustly trained classifier (AT) to our bounds on optimal loss. For both datasets, we see a large gap
between the performance of adversarial training and our bounds (including the upper bound from the
Caro-Wei approximation LCW ), even at small values of ϵ. This suggests that current robust training
techniques are currently unable to optimally fit the training data in multiclass classification tasks of
interest. In addition, we also checked the performance of state-of-the-art verifiably robust models on
these two datasets from a leaderboard (18). For MNIST, the best certifiably robust model has a 0 − 1
loss of 0.27 at a budget of 1.52 and 0.44 at a budget of 2.0, while for CIFAR-10, the best certifiably
robust model has a 0 − 1 loss of 0.6 at a budget of 1.0 and 0.8 at a budget of 2.0. These are much
higher than the optimal lower bound that is achievable for these datasets which is 0 in all these cases.
Takeaway: Performance of state-of-the-art robust models, both empirical and verifiable, exhibit a
large gap from the range of values predicted by our bounds on optimal 0 − 1 loss, even when ϵ is
small. Future research focusing on developing algorithms to decrease this gap while maintaining
generalization capabilities may lead to improvements in model robustness.


5   Discussion and Related Work

Related Work: When the data distribution satisfies certain properties, Dohmatob (11) and Mahlouji-
far et al. (20) use the ‘blowup’ property to determine bounds on the robust loss, given some level of
loss on benign data. We note that these papers use a different loss function that depends on the original
classification output on benign data, thus their bounds are not comparable. Bhagoji et al. (5; 6), and
Pydi et al. (22) provide lower bounds on robust loss when the set of classifiers under consideration
is all measurable functions. These works only provide bounds in the binary classification setting.
Work on verifying robustness (7; 28; 13; 18) provides bounds on the robustness of specific classifiers.
Yang et al. (30) independently introduced the concept of a ‘conflict graph’ to obtain robust non-
parametric classifiers via an adversarial pruning defense. The closest related work to ours is Trillos
et al. (29), which uses optimal transport theory to find lower bounds on multi-class classification
that are applicable for both continuous and discrete distributions. While their theoretical bounds
are exact and more general than ours, accounting for distributional adversaries, their numerically
computed bounds via the Sinkhorn algorithm are approximate and converge to the true value only as
the entropy regularization decreases. In contrast, we provide methods to directly compute the optimal
loss for discrete distributions, along with efficient methods for determining its range to overcome the
computational bottlenecks encountered.
Discussion and Limitations: Our work in this paper firmly establishes for the multi-class case what
was known only in the binary setting before: there exists a large gap in the performance of current
robust classifiers and the optimal classifier. It also provides methods to bound the loss efficiently
in practice, giving practitioners quick means to determine the gap. The question then arises: why
does this gap arise and how can we improve training to decrease this gap? This paper, however,
does not tackle the problem of actually closing this gap. Possible methods include increasing the
architecture size (26), using additional data (15) and using soft-labels (6). A surprising finding from
our experiments was that the addition of hyperedges to the multi-way conflict graph did not change
the lower bounds much, indicating we are in a regime where multi-way intersections minimally
impact optimal probabilities. One major limitation of our work is the computational expense at
larger budgets, sample sizes and class sizes. We suspect this is due to the general-purpose nature of
the solvers we use and future work should look into developing custom algorithms to speed up the
determination of lower bounds.


Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding

ANB, WD and BYZ were supported in part by NSF grants CNS-2241303, CNS-1949650, and the
DARPA GARD program. SD was supported in part by the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-2039656. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect


                                                   10
the views of the National Science Foundation. SD and PM were supported in part by the National
Science Foundation under grant CNS-2131938, the ARL’s Army Artificial Intelligence Innovation
Institute (A2I2), Schmidt DataX award, and Princeton E-ffiliates Award.

References
 [1] N. Alon and J. H. Spencer. The probabilistic method. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
 [2] M. S. Andersen, J. Dahl, and L. Vandenberghe. Cvxopt: Python software for convex optimiza-
     tion, 2013.
 [3] M. ApS. MOSEK Optimizer API for Python 10.0.22, 2019. URL https://docs.mosek.com/
     10.0/pythonapi/index.html.
 [4] A. N. Bhagoji, W. He, B. Li, and D. Song. Exploring the space of black-box attacks on deep
     neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09491, 2017.
 [5] A. N. Bhagoji, D. Cullina, and P. Mittal. Lower bounds on adversarial robustness from optimal
     transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 7496–7508, 2019.
 [6] A. N. Bhagoji, D. Cullina, V. Sehwag, and P. Mittal. Lower bounds on cross-entropy loss in
     the presence of test-time adversaries. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
     Machine Learning, 2021.
 [7] R. Bunel, I. Turkaslan, P. H. Torr, P. Kohli, and M. P. Kumar. A unified view of piecewise linear
     neural network verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00455, 2017.
 [8] N. Carlini and D. A. Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. CoRR,
     abs/1608.04644, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.04644.
 [9] F. Croce and M. Hein. Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensemble of diverse
     parameter-free attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2206–2216.
     PMLR, 2020.
[10] D. Cullina, A. N. Bhagoji, and P. Mittal. Pac-learning in the presence of adversaries. In
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 230–241, 2018.
[11] E. Dohmatob. Generalized no free lunch theorem for adversarial robustness. In Proceedings of
     the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1646–1654, 2019.
[12] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples. In
     International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
[13] S. Gowal, K. Dvijotham, R. Stanforth, R. Bunel, C. Qin, J. Uesato, T. Mann, and P. Kohli. On
     the effectiveness of interval bound propagation for training verifiably robust models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1810.12715, 2018.
[14] S. Gowal, C. Qin, J. Uesato, T. Mann, and P. Kohli. Uncovering the limits of adversarial training
     against norm-bounded adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03593, 2020.
[15] S. Gowal, S. Rebuffi, O. Wiles, F. Stimberg, D. A. Calian, and T. A. Mann. Improving
     robustness using generated data. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. N. Dauphin, P. Liang,
     and J. W. Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual
     Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14,
     2021, virtual, pages 4218–4233, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
     2021/hash/21ca6d0cf2f25c4dbb35d8dc0b679c3f-Abstract.html.
[16] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
[17] Y. LeCun and C. Cortes. The MNIST database of handwritten digits. 1998.
[18] L. Li, T. Xie, and B. Li. Sok: Certified robustness for deep neural networks. In 2023 IEEE
     Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 1289–1310. IEEE, 2023.


                                                 11
[19] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu. Towards deep learning models
     resistant to adversarial attacks. In ICLR, 2018.
[20] S. Mahloujifar, D. I. Diochnos, and M. Mahmoody. The curse of concentration in robust
     learning: Evasion and poisoning attacks from concentration of measure. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 4536–4543, 2019.
[21] O. Montasser, S. Hanneke, and N. Srebro. Vc classes are adversarially robustly learnable, but
     only improperly. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04217, 2019.
[22] M. S. Pydi and V. Jog. Adversarial risk via optimal transport and optimal couplings. In
     Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7814–7823,
     2020.
[23] M. S. Pydi and V. Jog. The Many Faces of Adversarial Risk, Jan. 2022. URL http://arxiv.
     org/abs/2201.08956. arXiv:2201.08956 [cs, math, stat].
[24] E. R. Scheinerman and D. H. Ullman. Fractional Graph Theory: A Rational Approach to
     the Theory of Graphs. Wiley, Sept. 1997. ISBN 978-0-471-17864-4. Google-Books-ID:
     KujuAAAAMAAJ.
[25] L. Schmidt, S. Santurkar, D. Tsipras, K. Talwar, and A. Madry. Adversarially robust generaliza-
     tion requires more data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.11285, 2018.
[26] V. Sehwag, S. Mahloujifar, T. Handina, S. Dai, C. Xiang, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal. Robust
     learning meets generative models: Can proxy distributions improve adversarial robustness? In
     The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event,
     April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
     WVX0NNVBBkV.
[27] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus.
     Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
[28] V. Tjeng, K. Y. Xiao, and R. Tedrake. Evaluating robustness of neural networks with mixed
     integer programming. In ICLR, 2019.
[29] N. G. Trillos, M. Jacobs, and J. Kim. The multimarginal optimal transport formulation of
     adversarial multiclass classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(45):1–56,
     2023.
[30] Y.-Y. Yang, C. Rashtchian, Y. Wang, and K. Chaudhuri. Robustness for non-parametric classifi-
     cation: A generic attack and defense. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
     Statistics, pages 941–951. PMLR, 2020.
[31] H. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Jiao, E. P. Xing, L. E. Ghaoui, and M. I. Jordan. Theoretically principled
     trade-off between robustness and accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08573, 2019.




                                                 12
This Supplementary Material accompanies paper: Characterizing the Optimal 0 − 1 Loss for Multi-
class Classification with a Test-time Attacker to NeurIPS 2023.
We first present proofs for lemmas from the main body in §A. We then explain fractional packing and
covering in §B. We present our algorithm for hyperedge finding in §C. §D contains further details
about the experimental setup with all additional experimental results in §E.

A    Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1. This follows immediately from Lemma 2 with m = K.


Proof of Lemma 2. Recall that the definition of the correct-classification probabilities is
                               qm,N (h)(x,y) =       inf            min     h(x̃, C)y
                                                   x̃∈N (x) C∈([K]):y∈C
                                                                    m


and the set of achievable correct-classification probabilities is
                                                [ Y
                                   PV,N,H =            [0, qN (h)v ].
                                                    h∈H v∈V


First, we will show Pm,V,N,Hsof t ⊆ {q ∈ RV : q ≥ 0, B ≤m q ≤ 1}. The constraint h ∈ Hsof t ,
0 ≤ qm,N (h) ≤ 1 holds because classification probabilities h(x̃, C)y must lie in the range [0, 1].
We will now demonstrate that the constraint B ≤m q ≤ 1 must also hold. Let e =
((x1 , y1 ), ..., (xℓ , yℓ )) be a size-ℓ hyperedge in E (≤m) . By construction of E (≤m) , there exists some
      Tℓ
x̃ ∈ i=1 N (xi ). Let S ∈ [K]
                                         
                                      m be some superset of {y1 , . . . , yℓ }, which exists because ℓ ≤ m.
From the definition of qm,N (h), we have that qm,N (h)(xi ,yi ) ≤ h(x̃, S)yi for each 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. Thus,
                       ℓ
                       X                           ℓ
                                                   X                      X
                             qm,N (h)(xi ,yi ) ≤         h(x̃, S)yi ≤           h(x̃, S)j = 1.
                       i=1                         i=1                    j∈Y

This gives (B ≤m q)e ≤ 1.
Now we will show Pm,V,N,Hsof t ⊇ {q ∈ RV : q ≥ 0, B ≤m q ≤ 1}.
For any vector q in the polytope, we have a classifier h : X × [K]
                                                                           [K]
                                                                  m →R          that achieves at least those
correct classification probabilities. This mean that h has the following properties. First, h(x̃, L)y ≥ 0
and y∈[K] h(x̃, L)y = 1. Second, for all (x, y) ∈ V, all x̃ ∈ N (x), and all L ∈ [K]
    P                                                                                          
                                                                                             m such that
y ∈ L, we have h(x̃, L)y ≥ q(x,y) .
To get h, first define the function g : X × [K]
                                                         [K]
                                                m →R          so g(x̃, L)y = 0 for i ̸∈ L and g(x̃, L)y =
                                                        ′
max(0, sup{q(xy ,y) : xy ∈ Vy , x̃ ∈ N (xy )}). Let L ⊆ L be the set of indices where g(x̃, L)y > 0.
Then any list of vertices e = (xy : y ∈ L′ , xy ∈ Vy , x̃ ∈ N (xy )) forms a hyperedge of size |L′ | ≤ m.
Thus                X                  X                      X
                         g(x̃, L)y =       g(x̃, L)y = sup        q(xy ,y) ≤ sup 1 = 1.
                                                                e                       e
                   y∈[K]                y∈L′                         y∈L′
                                                                P
To produce h, allocate the remaining probability (1 −                y g(x̃, L)y ) to an arbitrary class.


Proof of Lemma 3. The first part of this proof applies for any side-information size m. The adversarial
                  P C is a specified by a conditional p.m.f. pC|y (C|y). Thus py|C (y|C) =
strategy for selecting
pC|y (C|y)py (y)/ y′ pC|y (C|y ′ )py (y ′ ).
The optimal loss of the classifierP against a particular adversarial strategy is just a mixture of the
optimal losses for each class list: C pC|y (C|y) Pr[py (y)L∗ (P |(y ∈ {i, j}), N, H).
If pC|y (C|y) = pC|y (C|y ′ ) for all y, y ′ ∈ C, then py|C (y|C) = py (y)/ y′ ∈C py (y ′ ) and the
                                                                               P
adversary has not provided the classifier with extra information beyond the fact that y ∈ C. Thus
Px|y Py|C = P |(y ∈ C).


                                                           13
Now we can spcialize to the m = 2 case. Any stochastic matrix s with zeros on the diagonal specifies
an adversarial strategy for selecting C with pC|y ({i, j}|i) = si,j . Furthermore, if s is also symmetric,
pC|y ({i, j}|i) = pC|y ({i, j}|j) and py|C (i|{i, j}) = py|C (j|{i, j}). Then the optimal classifier for
                                       K
                                         
the
P side-information game uses the 2 ∗optimal classifiers for the two-class games and incurs loss
   i,j P r[Y = i]ai,j si,j where ai,j = L (P |(y ∈ {i, j}), H, N ). Because the diagonal entries of a
are all zero, there is always a maximizing choice of s with a zero diagonal. Thus it is not necessary to
include that constraint on s when specifying the optimization.



Proof of Lemma 4. If w = 0, then the lower bound is zero and holds trivially. Otherwise, 1T1w w
forms a probability distribution over the vertices. Let X ∈ V N be a sequence of i.i.d. random vertices
with this distribution. From this sequence, we define a random independent set as follows. Include v
in the set if it appears in the sequence X before any of its neighbors in G. If v and v ′ are adjacent,
at most one of them can be included, so this procedure does in fact construct an independent set.
The probability that Xi = v is 1wT iw and the probability that Xi is v or is adjacent to v is ((A+I)w)
                                                                                                 1T w
                                                                                                        v
                                                                                                          .
The first time that the latter event occurs, v is either included in the set or ruled out. If wi > 0, the
                                                wv
probability that v is included in the set is ((A+I)w) v
                                                        and otherwise it is zero. Thus the quantity P (S
in Lemma 4 is the expected size of the random independent set and G must contain some independent
set at least that large.


B    Fractional packing and covering

In this section, we record some standard definition in fractional graph and hypergraph theory (24).
Let G = (V, E) be hypergraph and let B ∈ RE×V be its edge-vertex incidence matrix. That is,
Be,v = 1 if v ∈ e and Be,v = 0 otherwise. Let p ∈ RV be a vector of nonnegative vertex weights.
Let 0 be the vector of all zeros and let 1 be the vector of all ones (of whichever dimensions are
required).
A fractional vertex packing in G is a vector q ∈ RV in the polytope
                                          q≥0         Bq ≤ 1.
The minimum weight fractional vertex packing linear program is

                                 min pT q    s.t. q ≥ 0        Bq ≤ 1.

A fractional hyperedge covering in G for weights p is a vector z ∈ RV in the polytope

                                         q≥0         B T z ≥ p.
The minimum weight fractional hyperedge covering linear program is

                                 min 1T z    s.t.   z ≥ 0,   B T z ≥ p.
                                   z

These linear programs form a dual pair.
The independent set polytope for G is the convex hull of the independent set indicator vectors.
Let G ′ be a graph on the vertex set V. A clique in G ′ is a subset of vertices in which every pair are
adjacent. Let C be the set of cliques of G ′ and let C ∈ RC×V be the clique vertex incidence matrix.
(In fact this construction can be interpreted as another hypergraph on V.) A fractional clique cover in
G ′ for vertex weights p is a vector z ∈ RC in the polytope

                                          q≥0        C T z ≥ p.
Somewhat confusingly, the dual concept is called a fractional independent set in G ′ . This is a vector
q ∈ RV in the polytope
                                     q≥0          Cq ≤ 1.


                                                    14
C    Hyperedge Finding

One challenge in computing lower bounds for 0 − 1 loss in the multi-class setting is that we need
to find hyperedges in the conflict hypergraph. In this section, we will consider an ℓ2 adversary:
N (x) = {x′ ∈ X | ||x′ − x||2 ≤ ϵ} and describe an algorithm for finding hyperedges within the
conflict graph.
We first note that for an n-way hyperedge to exist between n inputs {xi }ni=1 , {xi }ni=1 must all lie on
the interior of an n − 1-dimensional hypersphere of radius ϵ.
Given input x1 , ..., xn where xi ∈ Rd , we first show that distance between any two points in the
affine subspace spanned by the inputs can be represented by a distance matrix whose entries are the
squared distance between inputs. This allows us to compute the circumradius using the distance
information only, not requiring a coordinate system in high dimension. Then we find the circumradius
using the properties that the center of the circumsphere is in the affine subspace spanned by the inputs
and has equal distance to all inputs.
We construct matrix X ∈ Rd×n whose ith column is input xi . Let D ∈ Rn×n be the matrix of
squared distances between the inputs, i.e., Di,j = ∥xi − xj ∥2 .
We first notice that D can be represented by X and a vector in Rn whose ith entry is the squared
norm of xi . Let ∆ ∈ Rn be such vector such that ∆i = ∥xi ∥2 = (X T X)i,i . Then given that Di,j is
the squared distance between xi and xj , we have

                                 Di,j = ∥xi ∥2 + ∥xj ∥2 − 2⟨xi , xj ⟩,
which implies that

                                    D = ∆1T + 1∆T − 2X T X.

Let α, β ∈ Rn be vectors of affine weights: 1T α = 1T β = 1. Then Xα and Xβ are two points in the
                                                                                      T
affine subspace spanned by the columns of X. The distance between Xα and Xβ is −(α−β) 2 D(α−β) ,
shown as below:
              −(α − β)T D(α − β)   −(α − β)T (∆1T + 1∆T − 2X T X)(α − β)
                                 =
                      2                               2
                                   −(0 + 0 − 2(α − β)T X T X(α − β))
                                 =
                                                   2
                                 = ∥Xα − Xβ∥2 .

Now we compute the circumradius using the squared distance matrix D. The circumcenter is in
the affine subspace spanned by the inputs so we let Xα to be the circumcenter where 1T α = 1.
Let e(i) ∈ Rn be the ith standard basis vector. The distance between the circumcenter and xi is
                                                                                 (i) T     (i)
∥Xα − Xe(i) ∥2 . From previous computation, we know that ∥Xα − Xe(i) ∥2 = −(α−e ) 2 D(α−e ) .
Since the circumcenter has equal distance to all inputs, we have

                     (α − e(1) )T D(α − e(1) ) = . . . = (α − e(n) )T D(α − e(n) ).                   (7)

Note that the quadratic term in α is identical in each of these expressions. In addition, e(i)T De(i) = 0
for all i. So equation 7 simplifies to the linear system

                                   e(i)T Dα = c =⇒ Dα = c1
                                                  =⇒ α = cD−1 1

for some constant c. Since 1T α = 1, we have
                                        1 = 1T α = c1T D−1 1
                                        1
                                      =⇒ = 1T D−1 1
                                        c


                                                   15
assuming that D is invertible. The square of the circumradius, r2 , which is the squared distance
between the circumcenter and x1 , is
                                        ∥Xα − Xe(1) ∥2
                                      −(α − e(1) )T D(α − e(1) )
                                    =
                                                   2
                                       (1)T        αT Dα
                                    =e      Dα −
                                                      2
                                           c2 1T D−1 1
                                    =c −
                                                 2
                                      c
                                    =
                                      2
                                            1
                                    = T −1 .
                                      21 D 1
                                                                       1
Therefore, assuming matrix D is invertible, the circumradius is √              .
                                                                    21T D −1 1
                                                            −1
The inverse of D can be computed as det    D
                                       adj D . Since α = cD    1, we have α = c det D        2  c
                                                                                adj D 1. As r = 2 ,
                                             det D
constant c is non-negative. Therefore, α ∝ adj D 1.
When all entries of α are non-negative, the circumcenter is a convex combination of the all inputs
and the circumsphere is the minimum sphere in Rn−1 that contains all inputs. Otherwise, the
circumsphere of {xi |αi > 0} is the minimum sphere contains all inputs.
After finding the radius of the minimum sphere that contains all inputs, we compare the radius with
the budget ϵ. If the radius is no larger than ϵ, then there is a hyperedge of degree n among the inputs.

D    Experimental Setup
In this section, we describe our experimental setup. Our code for computing bounds is also available
at https://github.com/inspire-group/multiclass_robust_lb.
Datasets: We compute lower bounds for MNIST (17), CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 (16). Since we do
not know the true distribution of these datasets, we compute lower bounds based on the empirical
distribution of the training set for each dataset.
Attacker: We will consider an ℓ2 adversary: N (x) = {x′ ∈ X | ||x′ − x||2 ≤ ϵ}. This has been used
in most prior work (5; 22; 29).
LP solver: For solving the LP in Equation (4), we primarily use the Mosek LP solver (3). When the
Mosek solver did not converge, we default to using CVXOpt’s LP solver (2).
Computing infrastructure. In order to compute lower bounds, we perform computations across 10
2.4 GHz Intel Broadwell CPUs. For adversarial training, we train on a single A100 GPU.

Training Details For MNIST, we use 40-step optimization to find adversarial examples during
                            ϵ
training and use step size 30 and train all models for 20 epochs. For CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we
use 10 step optimization to find adversarial examples and step size 7ϵ and train models for 100 epochs.
For MNIST TRADES training, we use β = 1 and for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we use β = 6.
Additionally, for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we optimize the model using SGD with learning rate
and learning rate scheduling from (14). For MNIST, we use learning rate 0.01.

Architectures used: For CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we report results from training a WRN-28-10
architecture. For MNIST, we train a small CNN architecture consisting of 2 convolutional layers,
each followed by batch normalization, ReLU, and 2 by 2 max pooling. The first convolutional layer
uses a 5 by 5 convolutional kernel and has 20 output channels. The second convolutional layer also
uses a 5 by 5 kernel and has 50 output channels. After the set of 2 convolutional layers with batch
normalization, ReLU, and pooling, the network has a fully connected layer with 500 output channels
followed by a fully connected classifier (10 output channels). In §E.8, we consider the impact of
architecture on closing the gap to the optimal loss.


                                                  16
E     Additional Experimental Results
In this Section, we provide additional experimental results to complement those from the main body
of the paper. We organize it as follows:

       • §E.1: We analyze a toy problem on 2D Gaussian data to get a better understanding of the
         impact of hyperedges on the optimal loss computation.
       • §E.2: We investigate why higher degree hyperedges dp not have a large impact on lower
         bounds at lower values of ϵ.
       • §E.3: We show the runtime explosion at higher values of ϵ that makes it challenging for us
         to report optimal loss values.
       • §E.4: Classwise L2 distance statistics and heatmaps for pairwise losses used to compute
         class-only lower bounds in main paper.
       • §E.5: We provide results with standard PGD-based adversarial training, and show it is
         outperformed by Trades.
       • §E.6: We provide results on the CIFAR-100 dataset.
       • §E.7: We show lower bounds for a different set of 3 classes than the one considered in the
         main body. Main takeaways remain the same.
       • §E.8: We ablate across larger neural networks to check if increasing capacity reduces the
         gap to optimal.
       • §E.9: We attempt dropping examples from the training set that even the optimal clasifier
         cannot classify correctly in order to improve convergence.
       • §E.10: We compute lower bounds on the test set for MNIST 3-class classification

E.1   Results for Gaussian data


                                         4
                                         3
                                         2
                                         1
                                         0
                                         1
                                         2
                                         3
                                         4
                                             4   3   2   1    0   1   2   3   4




Figure 4: A sample 3-class Gaussian problem (each color pertains to a class) and a corresponding
classifier for this problem shown in black. The classifier classifies a sample incorrectly when it lies
over the edge of the ϵ margin (shown by the red lines) nearest the corresponding Gaussian center.

We begin with a 3-way classification problem on 2D Gaussian data. To generate our Gaussian dataset,
we sample 1000 points per class from 3 spherical Gaussians with means at distance 3 away from
from the origin (a sample is shown in Figure 4). We compute multiclass lower bounds via the LP
in Lemma on robust accuracy at various ℓ2 budget ϵ and display these values in Figure 5 as L∗ (3).
Additionally, we compare to a deterministic 3 way classifier. This classifier is the best performing out
of the 2 strategies: 1) constantly predict a single class (thus achieving 23 loss) or 2) is the classifier
in black in Figure 4 which classifies incorrectly when a sample lies over the edge of the nearest ϵ
margin of the classifier.
We observe that at smaller values of ϵ, the loss achieved by the 3-way classifier matches optimal
loss (L∗ (3)); however, after ϵ = 2.5 for σ 2 = 0.05 and ϵ = 2.3 for σ 2 = 0.5, we find the classifier
no longer achieves optimal loss. This suggests that there is a more optimal classification strategy
at these larger values of ϵ. In Figures 6 and 7, we visualize the distribution of correct classification
probabilities obtained through solving the LP with and without considering hyperedges. These figures
are generated by taking a fresh sample of 1000 points from each class and coloring the point based on
the correct classification probability qv assigned to its nearest neighbor that was used in the conflict


                                                             17
        0.8          L * (2)                                                               0.8           L * (2)
                     L * (3)                                                                             L * (3)
        0.6          Classifier loss                                                       0.6           Classifier loss
0-1 loss




                                                                                    0-1 loss
        0.4                                                                                0.4
        0.2                                                                                0.2
        0.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8                                            0.0 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6


                             (a) σ 2 = 0.05                                                                       (b) σ 2 = 0.5

Figure 5: Lower bounds on error for the Gaussian 3-class problem (σ 2 = 0.05 and σ 2 = 0.5)
computed using only constraints from edges (L∗ (2)) and up to degree 3 hyperedges (L∗ (3)) in
comparison to the performance of the deterministic 3-way classifier depicted in Figure 4.


hypergraph when computing the lower bound. We observe from Figure 6, for all classes, the data are
mostly assigned classification probabilities around 0.5. In Figure 7, we can see that when we consider
hyperedges, we some of these 0.5 assignments are reassigned values close to 23 and 13 . Interestingly,
we notice that when we do not consider hyperedges, our solver finds an asymmetric solution to the
problem (strategies for class 0, 1, and 2 differ) while when considering hyperedges this solution
becomes symmetric.
                                                                                                 2                                           1.0
4                                             4




3                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                             0.8
                                              3




2                                             2
                                                                                                 0



1                                             1
                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                 1

0
                                              0


                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                             0.4
1
                                              1



2
                                              2
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                             0.2
3
                                              3
                                                                                                 4

    4      3     2   1   0      1   2             2   1    0   1   2        3   4                    4    3   2     1   0   1   2   3   4    0.0

                (a) Class 0                               (b) Class 1                                         (c) Class 2
Figure 6: Distribution of optimal classification probabilities across samples from each class of the
Gaussian obtained as a solution when computing L∗ (2).

                                                                                                 2                                           1.0
4                                             4




3                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                             0.8
                                              3




2                                             2
                                                                                                 0



1                                             1
                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                 1

0
                                              0


                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                             0.4
1
                                              1



2
                                              2
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                             0.2
3
                                              3
                                                                                                 4

    4      3     2   1   0      1   2             2   1    0   1   2        3   4                    4    3   2     1   0   1   2   3   4    0.0

                (a) Class 0                               (b) Class 1                                         (c) Class 2
Figure 7: Distribution of optimal classification probabilities across samples from each class of the
Gaussian obtained as a solution when computing L∗ (3).


E.2            Impact of hyperedges

In Figure 8, we show the count of edges, degree 3 hyperedges, and degree 4 hyperedges found in
the conflict hypergraphs of the MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 train sets. We note that we did


                                                                       18
   not observe any increase in loss when considering degree 4 hyperedges at the ϵ with a data point for
   number of degree 4 hyperedges in Figure 8. We find that the relative number of edges and hyperedges
   is not reflective of whether we expect to see an increase in loss after considering hyperedges. For
   example in CIFAR-10, at ϵ = 4.0, we there are about 100 times more hyperedges than edges, but
   we see no noticeable increase in the 0 − 1 loss lower bound when incorporating these hyperedge
   constraints.

                                           Edges                Degree 3 hyperedges               Degree 4 hyperedges

                             MNIST                                          CIFAR-10                                            CIFAR-100
                                                                                                                108
        107
                                                           107
        105                                                                                                     106
count




                                                   count




                                                                                                        count
                                                           105
        103                                                                                                     104
                                                           103                                                  102
        101
               1.5     2.0    2.5    3.0   3.5                    2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0                          2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0

                        (a) MNIST                                      (b) CIFAR-10                                         (c) CIFAR-100
   Figure 8: Number of edges, degree 3 hyperedges, and degree 4 hyperedges found in the conflict
   hypergraphs of MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 train sets. The red vertical line indicates the ϵ at
   which we noticed an increase in the 0 − 1 loss lower bound when considering degree 3 hyperedges.

   To understand why including more information about hyperedges does not influence the computed
   lower bound much, we examine the distribution of qv obtained from solutions to the LP with (L∗ (3))
   and without degree 3 hyperedges (L∗ (2)). Fig. 9 contains a histogram of the distributions of qv
   for MNIST. For small ϵ, there is no change in the distribution of qv , the distribution of qv is almost
   identical between L∗ (2) and L∗ (3). At larger values of ϵ, in L∗ (2), a significant fraction of vertices
   are assigned qv near 0.5. While these shift with the addition of hyperedges, very few of them were in
   triangles of G ≤2 that were replaced by a hyperedge in G ≤3 . This leads to the loss value changing
   minimally.
    Similar to Figure 9, we plot the distribution of vertex weights qv obtained through solving the LP
    for L∗ (2) and L∗ (3) for CIFAR-10 in Figure 10. Similar to trends for MNIST, we find that the gap
    between L∗ (2) and L∗ (3) only occurs when the frequency of 0.5 weights is higher.


                                                                        L * (2)         L * (3)

         1.0     Distribution of qv for =2.5                1.0    Distribution of qv for =3.0                   1.0    Distribution of qv for =3.5
         0.8                                                0.8                                                  0.8
         0.6                                                0.6                                                  0.6
 frequency




                                                    frequency




                                                                                                         frequency




         0.4                                                0.4                                                  0.4
         0.2                                                0.2                                                  0.2
         0.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                       0.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                         0.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                         qv                                                 qv                                                   qv
                        (a) ϵ = 2.5                                      (b) ϵ = 3.0                                          (c) ϵ = 3.5
    Figure 9: Distribution of optimal classification probabilities q obtained by solving the LP with up to
    degree 2 hyperedges (m = 2) and up to degree 3 hyperedges (m = 3) on the MNIST training set.

    E.3              Computational complexity of computing lower bounds

   Our experiments of L∗ (3) and L∗ (4) at higher ϵ are limited due to computation constraints. Figure 11
   we see that the time taken to compute the L∗ (3) grows rapidly with ϵ. We also report timings for all
   bounds for CIFAR-10 at ϵ = 4 in Table 2. In future work, we are seeking algorithmic optimization to
   achieve more results at high ϵ.


                                                                                  19
                                                                         L * (2)               L * (3)

                  Distribution of qv for =3.5                       Distribution of qv for =4.0                                  Distribution of qv for =4.5
                                                              0.8
        0.8                                                                                                              0.6
        0.6                                                   0.6
frequency




                                                      frequency




                                                                                                                 frequency
                                                                                                                         0.4
        0.4                                                   0.4
                                                              0.2                                                        0.2
        0.2
        0.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                          0.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                               0.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                        qv                                                    qv                                                         qv
                        (a) ϵ = 3.5                                       (b) ϵ = 4.0                                                   (c) ϵ = 4.5
   Figure 10: Distribution of optimal classification probabilities q obtained by solving the LP with up to
   degree 2 hyperedges (L∗ (2)) and up to degree 3 hyperedges (L∗ (3)) on the CIFAR-10 training set.


                                                                         L * (2)               L * (3)

                               MNIST                                                                                         CIFAR-10
            105                                                                    104
                                                                                   103
            103
    time (s)




                                                                            time (s)

                                                                                   102
                                                                                   101
            101
                                                                                   100
                  2.0    2.5    3.0    3.5      4.0                                      2.0     2.5     3.0    3.5            4.0      4.5   5.0     5.5      6.0


                        (a) MNIST                                                                              (b) CIFAR-10
                                                                             ∗                   ∗
                        Figure 11: Time taken to compute L (2) and L (3) for MNIST and CIFAR-10.


   E.4             Classwise statistics and pairwise losses

   In order to have a better understanding of the difficulty of the classification task under the presence of
   an ℓ2 bounded adversary, we report the average ℓ2 to the nearest neighbor of another class for each
   class in the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets in Table 3.
  Another way of understanding the relative difficulty of classifying between classes is by computing
  the optimal loss for all 1v1 binary classification tasks. We note that these values are used in Section
  4.2 to compute a lower bound on the optimal loss in the 10-class case from maximum weight coupling
  over optimal losses for 1v1 binary classification problems. In Figure 12, we show the heat maps
  for optimal losses for each pair of 1v1 classification problems for ϵ = 3 on MNIST and ϵ = 4 on
  CIFAR-10. We find that for both datasets only a few pairs of classes have high losses. Specifically,
  for MNIST, we find that the class pairs 4-9 and 7-9 have significantly higher loss than all other pairs
  of classes. For CIFAR-10, we find that 2-4 has the highest loss compared to other pairs, and 2-6 and
  6-4 are also quite high.

   E.5             Additional adversarial training results

   In Figure 13, we also add the loss achieved by PGD adversarial training. We find that this approach
   generally performs worse on MNIST compared to TRADES and is also unable to fit to CIFAR-10
   data at the ϵ values tested.

   E.6             Truncated hypergraph lower bounds for CIFAR-100

  We provide results for truncated hypergraph lower bounds for the CIFAR-100 train set. We observe
  that similar to MNIST and CIFAR-10, including more hyperedge constraints does not influence the
  computed lower bound.


                                                                                   20
                                     Loss bound Runtime (s)
                                     L∗ (2)           188.24
                                     L∗ (3)           10413.91
                                     L∗ (4)           >86400
                                     L∗co (2)         327.92
                                     LCW              192.27
Table 2: Runtimes for computing different bounds for CIFAR-10 dataset at ϵ = 4. We note that the
L∗co (2) reports the time for computing all pairwise losses sequentially and can be sped up by running
these computations in parallel. We also note that L∗ (4) computation did not terminate within a day.


                   0      1       2      3      4       5       6       7       8     9
      MNIST      7.07 4.33 6.94 6.29 5.72 6.29 6.42 5.52 6.29 5.15
     CIFAR-10 8.96 10.84 8.48 9.93 8.22 10.04 8.72 10.05 9.23 10.91
Table 3: Average ℓ2 distance to nearest neighbor in another class for each class in MNIST and
CIFAR-10 datasets.



E.7    Computed bounds for a different set of 3-classes

In Figure 15, we plot 3-class lower bounds via truncated hypergraphs (L∗ (2) and L∗ (3)) for a
different set of 3 classes as shown in the main body. These classes generally have less similarity than
the classes shown in the main body of the paper causing the loss bound to increase more slowly as
epsilon increases. However, we find that patterns observed for the 3 classes present in the main body
of the paper are also present here: the gap between L∗ (2) and L∗ (3) is only visible at large values of
0-1 loss (ie. loss of 0.4).

E.8    Impact of architecture size

Previously, we saw that adversarial training with larger values of ϵ generally fails to converge (leading
to losses matching random guessing across 3 classes). We now investigate whether increasing model
capacity can resolve this convergence issue. In Figure 16, we plot the training losses of 3 WRN
architectures commonly used in adversarial ML research across attack strength ϵ for the 3-class
CIFAR-10 (classes 0, 2, 8) problem. All models are trained with TRADES adversarial training.
Interestingly, we find that the benefit of larger architecture size only appears for the smallest value of
epsilon plotted (ϵ = 1) at which the optimal classifier can theoretically obtain 0 loss. At larger values
of epsilon, the improvement in using larger architecture generally disappears.

E.9    Impact of dropping "hard" examples

From our experiments involving adversarial training, we found that training with large values of
ϵ generally fails to converge. A potential way of trying to improve convergence using the results
from our LP is to drop examples with optimal classification probability less than 1 and train with
the remaining examples. Since even the optimal classifier cannot classify these examples correctly,
these examples can be considered "hard" to learn. We find that in practice this does not lead to lower
training loss; specifically, training without "hard" examples leads to a loss of 0.64 for CIFAR-10 with
ϵ = 3 while training with "hard" examples leads to a loss 0.57. We note that this loss is computed
over the entire training dataset (including "hard" examples) for both settings.

E.10    Lower bounds on test set

In the main text, we computer lower bounds on the train set as this would measure how well existing
training algorithms are able to fit to the training data. In Table 4, we compute lower bounds on the
test set (which contains 1000 samples per class) for MNIST 3-class classification between classes 1,
4, and 7. We find that the computed loss is similar to what is computed on a subset of the train set
which contains the same number of samples per class.




                                                   21
                  MNIST pairwise loss when =3                             0.30                       CIFAR-10 pairwise loss when =4         0.200
        0                                                                                  0
        1                                                                                  1                                                0.175
                                                                          0.25
        2                                                                                  2                                                0.150
        3                                                                 0.20             3                                                0.125
        4                                                                                  4
Class




                                                                                   Class
                                                                          0.15                                                              0.100
        5                                                                                  5
        6                                                                                  6                                                0.075
                                                                          0.10
        7                                                                                  7                                                0.050
        8                                                                 0.05             8                                                0.025
        9                                                                                  9
             0    1   2     3     4 5     6       7       8    9          0.00                  0     1   2     3   4 5     6   7   8   9   0.000
                                  Class                                                                             Class

                           (a) MNIST (ϵ = 3)                                                                  (b) CIFAR-10 (ϵ = 4)
                  Figure 12: Heat maps for optimal loss for each pair of 1v1 classification problems.


            0.8                                                                                0.8
            0.6                                                                                0.6
0-1 loss




                                                                                   0-1 loss
            0.4                                             L * (2)                            0.4                          L * (2)
                                                            L * (3)                                                         L * (3)
            0.2                                             TRADES-AT                          0.2                          TRADES-AT
                                                            PGD-AT                                                          PGD-AT
            0.0 2.0       2.5     3.0     3.5            4.0 4.5 5.0                           0.0 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0


                           (a) MNIST (1, 7, 9)                                                            (b) CIFAR-10 (0, 2, 8)
Figure 13: Lower bounds on error for MNIST and CIFAR-10 3-class problems (1000 samples per
class) computed using only constraints from edges (L∗ (2)) and up to degree 3 hyperedges (L∗ (3)) in
comparison to TRADES adversarial training (TRADES-AT) and PGD adversarial training (PGD-AT)
loss.
                                                      0.8
                                                                         L * (2)
                                                      0.6                L * (3)
                                                                         L * (4)
                                              0-1 loss




                                                      0.4
                                                      0.2
                                                      0.0 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5


                          Figure 14: Lower bounds for optimal 0-1 loss the for CIFAR-100 train set

                                MNIST Class 2, 5, 8                                                             CIFAR-10 Class 1, 4, 9
            0.6       L * (2)                                                                  0.6        L * (2)
                      L * (3)                                                                             L * (3)
            0.4                                                                                0.4
0-1 loss




                                                                                   0-1 loss




            0.2                                                                                0.2

            0.0 2.0       2.5     3.0     3.5            4.0       4.5     5.0                 0.0 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0


                           (a) MNIST (2, 5, 8)                                                            (b) CIFAR-10 (1, 4, 9)
Figure 15: Lower bounds on error for MNIST and CIFAR-10 3-class problems (1000 samples per
class) computed using only constraints from edges (L∗ (2)) and up to degree 3 hyperedges (L∗ (3))
                                               22
                                 1.0
                                             L * (3)
                                 0.8         WRN-28-10
                                             WRN-34-10
                                 0.6         WRN-70-16
                          0-1 loss
                                 0.4
                                 0.2
                                 0.0
                                       1.0   1.5   2.0   2.5    3.0   3.5   4.0   4.5   5.0


Figure 16: Impact of architecture size on training loss for 3-class CIFAR (0, 2, 8) at different strengths
ϵ for models trained with TRADES adversarial training.




                                                     train set
                          ϵ          train set                         test set
                                           (1000 samples per class)
                          2     0.0045                0.0020           0.0025
                         2.5 0.0260                   0.0193           0.0149
                          3     0.1098                0.0877           0.0773
                         3.5 0.2587                   0.2283           0.2181
                          4        -                  0.4083           0.3987
Table 4: Optimal losses L∗ (3) for MNIST 3 class problem (classes 1, 4, 7) computed across the train
set, the first 1000 samples of each class in the train set, and computed across the test set.




                                                           23
