                                         Preprint. Under Review.




                                         ACCURATE AND S CALABLE E STIMATION OF E PISTEMIC
                                         U NCERTAINTY FOR G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
                                          Puja Trivedi∗                                             Mark Heimann
                                          CSE Department, University of Michigan                    Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

                                          Rushil Anirudh                                            Danai Koutra
                                          Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory                    CSE Department, University of Michigan
arXiv:2309.10976v1 [cs.LG] 20 Sep 2023




                                          Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan
                                          Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory



                                                                                       A BSTRACT
                                                     Safe deployment of graph neural networks (GNNs) under distribution shift requires
                                                     models to provide accurate confidence indicators (CI). However, while it is well-
                                                     known in computer vision that CI quality diminishes under distribution shift,
                                                     this behavior remains understudied for GNNs. Hence, we begin with a case
                                                     study on CI calibration under controlled structural and feature distribution shifts
                                                     and demonstrate that increased expressivity or model size do not always lead
                                                     to improved CI performance. Consequently, we instead advocate for the use of
                                                     epistemic uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods to modulate CIs. To this end,
                                                     we propose G-∆UQ, a new single model UQ method that extends the recently
                                                     proposed stochastic centering framework to support structured data and partial
                                                     stochasticity. Evaluated across covariate, concept, and graph size shifts, G-∆UQ
                                                     not only outperforms several popular UQ methods in obtaining calibrated CIs, but
                                                     also outperforms alternatives when CIs are used for generalization gap prediction
                                                     or OOD detection. Overall, our work not only introduces a new, flexible GNN UQ
                                                     method, but also provides novel insights into GNN CIs on safety-critical tasks.


                                         1       I NTRODUCTION
                                         As graph neural networks (GNNs) are increasingly deployed in critical applications with test-time
                                         distribution shifts (Zhang & Chen, 2018; Gaudelet et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2018; Yan et al., 2019;
                                         Zhu et al., 2022), it becomes necessary to expand model evaluation to include safety-centric metrics,
                                         such as calibration errors (Guo et al., 2017), out-of-distribution (OOD) rejection rates (Hendrycks &
                                         Gimpel, 2017), and generalization gap estimates (Jiang et al., 2019), to holistically understand model
                                         performance in such shifted regimes (Hendrycks et al., 2022b; Trivedi et al., 2023b). Notably, such
                                         additional metrics often rely on confidence indicators (CIs), such as maximum softmax or predictive
                                         entropy, which can be derived from prediction probabilities. Although there is a clear understanding
                                         in the computer vision literature that the quality of confidence indicators can noticeably deteriorate
                                         under distribution shifts (Wiles et al., 2022; Ovadia et al., 2019), and additional factors like model
                                         size or expressivity can exacerbate this deterioration (Minderer et al., 2021), the impact of these
                                         phenomena on graph neural networks (GNNs) remains under-explored.
                                         Indeed, there is an expectation that adopting more advanced or expressive architectures (Chuang &
                                         Jegelka, 2022; Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al., 2022; Rampášek et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2022)
                                         would inherently improve CI calibration on graph classification tasks. Yet, we find that using graph
                                         transformers (GTrans) (Rampášek et al., 2022) or positional encodings (Dwivedi et al., 2022a; Wang
                                         et al., 2022b; Li et al., 2020) do not significantly improve CI calibration over vanilla message-passing
                                         GNNs (MPGNNs) even under controlled, label-preserving distribution shifts. Notably, when CIs are
                                         not well-calibrated, GNNs with high accuracy may perform poorly on the additional safety metrics,
                                             ∗
                                                 Correspondence to: pujat@umich.edu


                                                                                             1
Preprint. Under Review.




leading to unforeseen risks during deployment. Given that using advanced architectures is not an
immediately viable solution for improving CI calibration, we instead advocate for modulating CIs
using epistemic uncertainty estimates.
Uncertainty quantification (UQ) methods (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017;
Blundell et al., 2015) have been extensively studied for vision models (Guo et al., 2017; Minderer
et al., 2021), and have been used to improve vision model CI performance under distribution
shifts. Our work not only studies the effectiveness of such methods on improving GNN CIs, but
also proposes a novel UQ method, G-∆UQ, which extends the recently proposed, state-of-the-art
stochastic data-centering (or “anchoring”) framework (Thiagarajan et al., 2022; Netanyahu et al.,
2023) to support partial stochasticity and structured data. In brief, stochastic centering provides a
scalable alternative to highly effective, but prohibitively expensive, deep ensembles by efficiently
sampling a model’s hypothesis space, in lieu of training multiple, independently trained models.
When using the uncertainty-modulated confidence estimates from G-∆UQ, we outperform other
popular UQ methods, on not only improving the CI calibration under covariate, concept and graph
size shifts, but also in improving generalization gap prediction and OOD detection performance.
Proposed Work. This work studies the effectiveness of GNN CIs on the graph classification tasks
with distribution shifts, and proposes a novel uncertainty-based method for improving CI performance.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
Sec. 2: Case Study on CI Calibration. We find that improving GNN expressivity does not mitigate
CI quality degradation under distribution shifts.
Sec. 4: (Partially) Stochastic Anchoring for GNNs. We propose G-∆UQ, a novel UQ method
based on stochastic centering for GNNs with support for partial stochasticity.
Sec. 5: Evaluating Uncertainty-Modulated CIs under Distribution Shifts. Across covariate,
concept and graph-size shifts and a suite of evaluation protocols (calibration, OOD rejection, general-
ization gap prediction), we demonstrate the effectiveness of G-∆UQ.

2   C ASE S TUDY ON GNN CI C ALIBRATION

In this section, we demonstrate that GNNs struggle to provide calibrated confidence estimates under
distribution shift (Dwivedi et al., 2020) despite, improvements in architectures (He et al., 2022; Corso
et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2022) and expressivity (Wang et al., 2022b; Dwivedi et al., 2022a). Since
assessing calibration performance does not require any additional, potentially confounding, post-
processing, we perform a direct assessment of GNN CI reliability and motivate why uncertainty-based
CI modulation is needed.
Notations. Let G = (X, E, A, Y ) be a graph with node features X ∈ RN ×dℓ , (optional) edge
features E ∈ Rm×dℓ , adjacency matrix A ∈ RN ×N , and graph-level label Y ∈ {0, 1}c , where
N, m, dℓ , c denote the number of nodes, number of edges, feature dimension and number of classes,
respectively. We use i to index a particular sample in the dataset, e.g. Gi , Xi .
Then, we can define a graph neural network consisting of ℓ message passing layers (MPNN), a
graph-level readout function (READOUT), and classifier head (MLP) as follows:
                             Xℓ+1   ℓ+1
                                          = MPNNℓe Xℓ , Eℓ , A ,
                                                                  
                               M , E                                                    (1)
                                                             ℓ+1
                                                                 
                                     G = READOUT XM ,                                   (2)
                                         Ŷ   = MLP (G) ,                                           (3)

where Xℓ+1
       M ,E
              ℓ+1
                  are intermediate node and edge representations, and G is the graph representation.
We focus on a graph classification setting throughout our paper.
Experimental Set-up: Our experimental set-up is as follows. All results are reported over three
seeds.
Models. While improving the expressivity of GNNs is an active area of research, positional encodings
(PEs) and graph-transformer (GTran) architectures (Müller et al., 2023) have proven to be particularly
popular due to their effectiveness, and flexibility. Indeed, GTrans are known to not only help mitigate
over-smoothing (a phenomenon where GNNs lose discriminative power) and over-squashing (a


                                                   2
Preprint. Under Review.




                  G- UQ (Ours)     MPNN+NoLPE        MPNN+LPE        GPS+LPE        L=3      L=4         L=5       dim=64       dim=128        dim=256
                 1.0                                        1.0                                           1.0


  Accuracy ( )
                 0.5                                         0.5                                          0.5

                 0.0                                         0.0                                          0.0

                 0.4                                         0.4                                          0.4
  ECE ( )




                 0.2                                         0.2                                          0.2
                 0.0                                         0.0                                          0.0
                       0° 10° 15° 25° 35° 40° 60° 90° 180°         0° 10° 15° 25° 35° 40° 60° 90° 180°          0° 10° 15° 25° 35° 40° 60° 90° 180°


Figure 1: Calibration on Structural Distortion Distribution Shifts. On a controlled graph structure
distortion shift, we evaluate models trained on the standard superpixel MNIST benchmark (Dwivedi
et al., 2020) on super-pixel k-nn graphs created from rotated MNIST images. While accuracy is
expected to decrease as distribution shift increases, we observe that the expected calibration error
also grows significantly worse. Importantly, this trend is persistent when considering transformer
architectural variants (GPS (Rampášek et al., 2022)), as well as different depths and widths. In
contrast, our proposed G-∆UQ method achieves substantial improvement in ECE without significantly
compromising on accuracy.



phenomenon where GNNs collapse node representations) (Alon & Yahav, 2021; Topping et al.,
2022) but also to better capture long-range dependencies in large graphs (Dwivedi et al., 2022b).
Critical to the success of any transformer architecture are well-designed PEs. Notably, graph PEs
help improve GNN and GTran expressivity by distinguishing between isomorphic nodes, as well
as capturing structural vs. proximity information (Dwivedi et al., 2022a). Here, we ask if these
enhancements translate to improved calibration under distribution shift with respect to simple MPNNs
by: (i) incorporating equivariant and stable PEs (Wang et al., 2022b); (ii) utilizing MPNN vs. GTran
architectures; and, (iii) changing model depth and width. We utilize the state-of-the-art, flexible
“general, powerful, scalable" (GPS) GTran (Rampášek et al., 2022) with the GatedGCN backbone.
For fair comparison, we use a GatedGCN as the compared MPNN.
Data. Superpixel-MNIST (Dwivedi et al., 2020; Knyazev et al., 2019; Velickovic et al., 2018) is a
popular graph classification benchmark that converts MNIST images into k nearest-neighbor graphs
of superpixels (Achanta et al., 2012). We select this benchmark as it allows for (i) a diverse set of well-
trained models without requiring independent, extensive hyper-parameter search and (ii) controlled,
label preserving distribution shifts. Inspired by Ding et al. (2021), we create structurally distorted
but valid graphs by rotating MNIST images by a fixed number of degrees and then creating the
super-pixel graphs from these rotated images. (See Appendix, Fig. 8.) Since superpixel segmentation
on these rotated images will yield different superpixel k-nn graphs without harming class information,
we can emulate label-preserving structural distortion shifts. Note, the models are trained only using
the original (0◦ rotation) graphs.
Evaluation. Calibrated models are expected to produce confidence estimates that match the true
probabilities of the classes being predicted (Naeini et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2017; Ovadia et al., 2019).
While poorly calibrated CIs are over/under confident in their predictions, calibrated CIs are more
trustworthy and can also improve performance on other safety-critical tasks which implicitly require
reliable prediction probabilities (see Sec. 5). Here, we report the top-1 label expected calibration
error (ECE) (Kumar et al., 2019; Detlefsen et al., 2022). Let pi be the top-1 probability, ci be the
                                                                            PN
predicted confidence, bi a uniformly sized bin in [0, 1]. Then, ECE := i bi ∥(pi − ci )∥.
Observations. In Fig. 1, we present our results and make the following observations.
Despite the aforementioned benefits in model expressivity, GPS performs noticeably worse compared
to the MPGNN, despite having comparable accuracies. This is apparent particularly at severe
shifts (60◦ , 90◦ , 180◦ rotations). Furthermore, we find that PEs have minimal effects on both
calibration and accuracy. This suggests that while these techniques may enhance theoretical and
empirical expressivity, they do not necessarily transfer to the safety-critical task of obtaining calibrated
predictions under distribution shifts. In addition, we investigate the impact of model depth and
width on calibration performance, considering that model size has been known to affect both the
calibration of vision models (Guo et al., 2017; Minderer et al., 2021) and the propensity for over-


                                                                                3
Preprint. Under Review.




squashing in GNNs (Xu et al., 2021). We see that increasing the number of message passing layers
(L = 3 → L = 5) can marginally improve accuracy, but it may also marginally decrease ECE.
Moreover, we find that increasing the width of the model can lead to slightly worse calibration at
high levels of shift (90◦ , 180◦ ), although accuracy is not compromised.
Notably, when we apply our proposed method G-∆UQ, (see Sec. 4), to the MPGNN with no
positional encodings, it significantly improves the calibration over more expressive variants (GPS,
LPE), across all levels of distribution shifts, while maintaining comparable accuracy. We briefly note
that we did not tune the hyper-parameters to our method to ensure a fair comparison, so we expect
that accuracy could be further improved. Overall, our results emphasize that obtaining reliable GNN
CIs remains a difficult problem that cannot be easily solved through advancements in architectures
and expressivity. This motivates our uncertainty-modulated CIs as an architecture-agnostic solution.

3     R ELATED W ORK
Here, we discuss techniques for improving CI reliability and the recently proposed stochastic centering
paradigm, before introducing our proposed method in Sec. 4.

3.1   I MPROVING C ONFIDENCE I NDICATORS

It is well known in computer vision that CIs are often unreliable or uncalibrated directly out-of-
the-box (Guo et al., 2017), especially under distribution shifts (Ovadia et al., 2019; Wiles et al.,
2022; Hendrycks et al., 2019). Given that reliable CIs are necessary for a variety of safety-critical
tasks, including generalization error prediction (GEP) (Jiang et al., 2019) and out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017), many strategies have been proposed to improve CI
calibration (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2017; Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Blundell et al.,
2015). One particularly effective strategy is to create a deep ensemble (DEns) (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017) by training a set of independent models (e.g., different hyper-parameters, random-seeds,
data order) where the mean predictions over the set is noticeably better calibrated. However, since
DEns requires training multiple models, in practice, it can be prohibitively expensive to use. To this
end, we focus on single-model strategies.
Single-model UQ techniques attempt to scalably and reliably provide uncertainty estimates, which
can then optionally be used to modulate the prediction probabilities. Here, the intuition is that when
the epistemic uncertainties are large in a data regime, confidence estimates can be tempered so that
they better reflect the accuracy degradation during extrapolation (e.g., training on small-sized graphs
but testing on large-sized graphs). Some popular strategies include: Monte Carlo dropout (MCD) (Gal
& Ghahramani, 2016) which performs Monte Carlo dropout at inference time and takes the average
prediction to improve calibration, temperature scaling (Temp) (Guo et al., 2017) which rescales logits
using a temperature parameter computed from a validation set, and SVI (Blundell et al., 2015) which
proposes a stochastic variational inference method for estimating uncertainty. While such methods
are more scalable than DeepEns, in many cases, they struggle to match its performance (Ovadia
et al., 2019). We note that while some recent works have studied GNN calibration, they focus on
node classification settings (Hsu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2021; Kang et al., 2022) and are not
directly relevant to this work as they make assumptions that are only applicable to node classification
tasks (e.g., proposing regularizers that rely upon on similarity to training nodes or neighbhorhood
similarity).

3.2   S TOCHASTIC C ENTERING FOR U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION

Recently, it was found that applying a (random) constant bias to vector-valued (and image) data
leads to non-trivial changes in the resulting solution of a DNN (Thiagarajan et al., 2022). This
behavior was attributed to the lack of shift-invariance in the neural tangent kernel (NTK) induced by
conventional neural networks such as MLPs and CNNs. Building upon this observation, Thiagarajan
et al. proposed a single model uncertainty estimation method, ∆-UQ, based on the principle of
anchoring. Conceptually, anchoring is the process of creating a relative representation for an input
sample x in terms of a random anchor c (which is used to perform the stochastic centering), [x − c, c].
By choosing different anchors randomly in each training iteration, ∆-UQ emulates the process of
sampling different solutions from the hypothesis space (akin to an ensemble). During inference, ∆-


                                                  4
Preprint. Under Review.




Figure 2: Overview of G-∆UQ. We propose three different stochastic centering variants that induce
varying levels of stochasticity in the underlying GNN. Notably, READOUT stochastic centering allows
for using pretrained models with G-∆UQ.


UQ aggregates multiple predictions obtained via different random anchors and produces uncertainty
estimates. Formally, given a trained stochastically centered model, fθ : [X − C, C] → Ŷ, let
C := Xtrain be the anchor distribution, x ∈ Xtest be a test sample, and anchor c ∈ C be anchor.
Then, the mean target class prediction, µ(y|x), and corresponding variance, σ(y|x) over K random
anchors are computed as:
                                          K
                                    1 X
                           µ(y|x) =       fθ ([x − ck , ck ])                                         (4)
                                    K
                                      k=1
                                    v
                                    u
                                    u 1 X      K
                           σ(y|x) = t            (fθ ([x − ck , ck ]) − µ)2                           (5)
                                      K −1
                                                 k=1

Since the variance over K anchors captures epistemic uncertainty by sampling different hypotheses,
these estimates can be used to modulate the predictions: µcalib. = µ(1 − σ). The resulting calibrated
predictions and uncertainty estimates have led to state-of-the-art performance on image outlier
rejection and calibration tasks, while still only requiring a single model. Furthermore, it was separately
shown that anchoring can also be used to improve the extrapolation behavior of DNNs (Netanyahu
et al., 2023). However, while an attractive paradigm, there are several challenges to using stochastic
centering with GNNs and graph data. We discuss and remedy these below in Sec. 4.


4    G RAPH -∆UQ: U NCERTAINTY- BASED P REDICTION C ALIBRATION

In this section, we introduce, G-∆UQ, a novel single-model UQ method that helps improve the
performance of CIs without sacrificing computational efficiency or accuracy by extending the recently
proposed stochastic centering paradigm to graph data. (See Fig. 2 for an overview.)
As discussed in Sec. 3, the stochastic centering and anchoring paradigm has demonstrated significant
promise in computer vision, yet there are several challenges that must be addressed prior to applying
it to GNNs and graph data. Notably, previous research on stochastic centering has focused on
traditional vision models (CNNs, ResNets, ViT) and relied on straightforward input space trans-
formations (e.g., subtraction and channel-wise concatenation: [X − C, C]) to construct anchored
representations. However, graph datasets are structured, discrete, and variable-sized, where such
trivial transformations do not exist. Moreover, the distribution shifts encountered in graph datasets
exhibit distinct characteristics compared to those typically examined in the vision literature that must
be accounted for when sampling the underlying GNN hypothesis space. Therefore, it is non-trivial to
design anchors that are capable of appropriately capturing epistemic uncertainty.
Below, we discuss not only how to extend stochastic centering to GNNs and structured data, (G-∆UQ),
but also propose partially stochastic and pretrained variants that further improve the capabilities of
anchored GNNs. In Section 5, we empirically demonstrate the advantages of our approach.


                                                    5
Preprint. Under Review.




4.1   N ODE F EATURE A NCHORING

Recall that in ∆-UQ, input samples are transformed into an anchored representation, by directly
subtracting the input and anchor, and then concatenating them channel-wise, where the first DNN
layer is correspondingly modified to accommodate the additional channels. While this is reasonable
for vector-valued data or images, due to the variability graph size and discrete nature, performing
a structural residual operation, (A − Ac , Ac ) with respect to a graph sample, G = (X, E, A, Y ),
and another anchor graph, Gc = (Xc , Ec , Ac , Yc ), would introduce artificial edge weights and
connectivity artifacts that can harm convergence. Likewise, we cannot directly anchor using the node
features, X, since the underlying graphs are different sizes, and a set of node features cannot be
considered IID. To this end, we first create a distribution over the training dataset node features and
sample anchors from this distribution as follows.
We first fit a Gaussian distribution (N (µ, σ)) to the training node features. Then, during training, we
randomly sample an anchor for each node. Mathematically, given the anchor CN ×d ∼ N (µ, σ), we
create the anchor/query node feature pair [Xi − C||Xi ], where || denotes concatenation, and i is the
node index. During inference, we sample a fixed set of K anchors and compute residuals for all nodes
with respect to the same anchor, e.g., c1×d k ∼ N (µ, σ) ([Xi −ck ||Xi ]), with appropriate broadcasting.
For datasets with categorical node features, it is more beneficial to perform the anchoring operation
after embedding the node features in a continuous space. Alternatively, considering the advantages of
PEs in enhancing model expressivity (Wang et al., 2022b), one can compute positional information
for each node and perform anchoring based on these encodings. While performing anchoring with
respect to the node features is perhaps the most direct extension of ∆-UQ to graphs, as it results in a
fully stochastically centered GNN, only using node features for anchoring neglects direct information
about the underlying structure, which may lead to less diversity when sampling from the hypothesis
space. Below, we introduce hidden layer variants that create partially stochastic GNNs that exploit
message-passing to capture both feature and structural information during hypothesis sampling.

4.2   H IDDEN L AYER A NCHORING

While performing anchoring in the input space creates a fully stochastic neural network as all
parameters are learned using the randomized input, it was recently demonstrated with respect to
Bayesian neural networks that relaxing the assumption of fully stochastic to partially stochastic neural
networks not only leads to strong computational benefits, but also may improve calibration (Sharma
et al., 2023). Motivated by this observation, we extend G-∆UQ to support anchoring in intermediate
layers, in lieu of the input layer. This allows for partially stochastic GNNs, wherein the layers prior
to the anchoring step are deterministic. Moreover, intermediate layer anchoring has the additional
benefit that anchors will be able to sample hypotheses that consider both topological and node feature
information due to MPNN steps, and supports using pretrained GNNs. We introduce these variants
below. (See Fig. 2 for a visual representation.)
Intermediate MPNN Anchoring: Given a GNN containing ℓ MPNN layers, let r ≤ ℓ be the layer
at which we perform node feature anchoring. We obtain the anchor/sample pair by computing the
intermediate node representations from the first r MPNN layers. We then randomly shuffle the node
features over the entire batch, (C = SHUFFLE(Xr+1   i   )), concatenate the residuals, and proceed with
the READOUT and MLP layers as with the standard ∆−UQ model. Note that, we do not consider the
gradients of the query sample when updating the parameters, and the MPNNr+1 layer is modified to
accept inputs of dimension dr × 2 (to take in anchored representations as inputs). Another difference
from the input space implementation is that we fix the set of anchors and subtract a single anchor
from all node representations in an iteration (instead of sampling uniquely), e.g., c1×d = Xr+1c  [n, :]
and [Xr+1
       i,n −   c||c]. This process is shown below,  assume   appropriate broadcasting:


                           Xr+1 = MPNN1...r
                           Xr+1 = MPNNr+1...ℓ [Xr+1 − C, Xr+1 ], A
                                                                           

                             Ŷ = MLP(READOUT Xℓ+1 )
                                                      




                                                   6
Preprint. Under Review.




Intermediate Read Out Anchoring: While READOUT anchoring is conceptually similar to intermediate
MPNN anchoring, we now only obtain a different anchor for each hidden graph representation, instead
of individual nodes. This allows us to sample hypotheses after all node information has been
aggregated over ℓ hops. This is demonstrated below:


                           G = READOUT (X) , Gc = READOUT (Xc )
                            Ŷ = MLP ([G − Gc , Gc ])


Pretrained Anchoring: Lastly, we note that in order to be compatible with the stochastic centering
framework (the input layer or chosen intermediate layer), the network architecture must be modified
and retrained from scratch. To circumvent this, we consider a variant of READOUT anchoring using
a pretrained GNN backbone. Here, the final MLP layer of a pretrained model is discarded, and
reinitialized to accommodate query/anchor pairs. We then freeze the MPNN, and only train the
anchored classifier head. This allows for an inexpensive, limited stochasticity GNN.
While all G-∆UQ variants are able to sample from the underlying hypothesis space (see Fig. 10),
each variant will provide somewhat different uncertainty estimates. Through our extensive evaluation,
we show that the complexity of the task and the nature of the distribution shift will determine which
of the variants is best suited and make some recommendations on which variants to use.

5     U NCERTAINTY- BASED P REDICTION C ALIBRATION UNDER D ISTRIBUTION
      S HIFT USING G-∆UQ
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of G-∆UQ in improving the reliability of CIs
on various tasks (calibration, generalization gap prediction and OOD detection) as well as various
distribution shifts (size, covariate and concept).

5.1   S IZE G ENERALIZATION

While GNNs are well-known to struggle when
generalizing to larger size graphs (Buffelli
et al., 2022; Yehudai et al., 2021; Chen et al.,              GCN              GIN           PNA
                                                      Acc ( )




2022), their predictive uncertainty behavior with
                                                         0.5             0.5           0.5
respect to such shifts remains under studied.
Given that such shifts can be expected at deploy-        0.0             0.0           0.0
ment, reliable uncertainty estimates under this
                                                      ECE ( )




                                                         0.5             0.5           0.5
setting are important for safety critical applica-
tions. We note that while sophisticated training         0.0             0.0           0.0
strategies can be used to improve size general-
                                                                L1
                                                                L2
                                                                L3
                                                                NA


                                                                         L1
                                                                         L2
                                                                         L3
                                                                         NA


                                                                                         L1
                                                                                         L2
                                                                                         L3
                                                                                         NA




ization (Buffelli et al., 2022; Bevilacqua et al.,
2021), our focus is primarily on the quality of un-
certainity estimates, so we do not consider such Figure 3: Impact of Layer Selection on G-∆UQ.
techniques. However, we note that G-∆UQ can Performing anchoring at different layers leads the
be used in conjunction with such techniques.        sampling of different hypothesis spaces. On D&D,
                                                    we see that later layer anchoring corresponds to a
Experimental Set-up. Following the procedure better inductive bias and can lead to dramatically
of (Buffelli et al., 2022; Yehudai et al., 2021), improved performance.
we create a size distribution shift by taking the
smallest 50%-quantile of graph size for the training set, and reserving the larger quantiles (>50%)
for evaluation. Unless, otherwise noted, we report results on the largest 10% quantile to capture
performance on the largest shift. We utilize this splitting procedure on four well-known benchmark
binary graph classification datasets from the TUDataset repository (Morris et al., 2020): D&D, NCI1,
NCI09, and PROTEINS. (See App. A.3 for dataset statistics.) We further consider three different
backbone GNN models, GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), GIN (Xu et al., 2019), and PNA (Corso et al.,
2020). All models contain three message passing layers and the same sized hidden representation.
The accuracy and expected calibration error on the larger-graph test set are reported for models
trained with and without stochastic anchoring.


                                                  7
Preprint. Under Review.




                                         DD                                 NCI1                                  NCI109                                  PROTEINS
                   GCN                 GIN       PNA             GCN      GIN       PNA              GCN       GIN           PNA             GCN        GIN       PNA
      0.5
Acc   0.0

      0.5
ECE

      0.0
            G UQ Base G UQ Base G UQ Base                G UQ Base G UQ Base G UQ Base           G UQ Base G UQ Base G UQ Base             G UQ Base G UQ Base G UQ Base


Figure 4: Predictive Uncertainty under Size Distribution Shifts. When evaluating the accuracy and
calibration error of models trained with and without stochastic anchoring on dataset with a graph size
distribution shift, we observe that stochastic centering decreases calibration error while improving or
maintaining accuracy across datasets and different GNNs.

                                               Vanilla            DEns        Temp             MCD           G- UQ                 Pretr. G- UQ
                                   GOODCMNIST-color                GOODMotifLPE-basis                 GOODMotifLPE-size                     GOODSST2-length
                            1.0
                                  concept   covariate    1.000
                                                                  concept     covariate       1.00
                                                                                                     concept     covariate                 concept    covariate
                                                                                                                                    0.94
                            0.9
                                                         0.995                                0.99
                                                                                                                                    0.92
                            0.8
               ID Acc




                                                         0.990                                0.98                                  0.90
                            0.7
                                                                                                                                    0.88
                                                         0.985                                0.97
                            0.6
                                                                                                                                    0.86
                            0.5                          0.980                                0.96

                         0.55                              1.0                                0.70                                  0.85
                         0.50                              0.8                                0.65                                  0.80
                         0.45
             OOD Acc




                                                           0.6                                0.60                                  0.75
                         0.40
                                                           0.4                                0.55                                  0.70
                         0.35
                         0.30                              0.2                                0.50                                  0.65

                         0.25                              0.0                                0.45                                  0.60

                                                                                              0.08
                         0.12                                                                                                       0.10
                                                          0.04
                         0.10                                                                 0.06                                  0.08
             ID Cal L2




                         0.08                             0.03
                                                                                                                                    0.06
                         0.06                                                                 0.04
                                                          0.02                                                                      0.04
                         0.04
                                                          0.01                                0.02
                         0.02                                                                                                       0.02

                         0.00                             0.00                                0.00                                  0.00

                                                           0.7
                            0.5                                                                0.4                                  0.30
                                                           0.6
                            0.4                                                                                                     0.25
                                                           0.5                                 0.3
               OOD Cal L2




                                                           0.4                                                                      0.20
                            0.3
                                                           0.3                                 0.2                                  0.15
                            0.2
                                                           0.2                                                                      0.10
                                                                                               0.1
                            0.1                            0.1                                                                      0.05
                            0.0                            0.0                                 0.0                                  0.00




Figure 5: Predictive Uncertainity under Concept and Covariate Shifts. Stochastic anchoring leads
to competitive in-distribution and out-of distribution test accuracy while improving calibration, across
domains and shifts. This is particularly true when comparing to other single-model UQ methods.


Results. As noted in Sec. 4, stochastic anchoring can be applied at different layers, leading to the
sampling of different hypothesis spaces and inductive biases. In order to empirically understand this
behavior, we compare the performance of stochastic centering when applied at different layers on
the D&D dataset, which comprises the most severe size shift from training to test set (see Fig. 3).
We observe that applying stochastic anchoring after the READOUT layer (L3) dramatically improves
both accuracy and calibration as the depth increases. While this behavior is less pronounced on
other datasets (see Fig. 11), we find overall that applying stochastic anchoring at the last layer yields
competitive performance on size generalization benchmarks and better convergence compared to
stochastic centering performed at earlier layers.
Indeed, in Fig. 4, we compare the performance of last-layer anchoring against a non-anchored model
on four datasets. We observe that G-∆UQ improves calibration performance on most datasets, while
generally maintaining or even improving the accuracy. Indeed, improvement is most pronounced on
the largest shift (D&D), further emphasizing the benefits of stochastic centering.

5.2                   E VALUATION UNDER C ONCEPT AND C OVARIATE S HIFTS

Here, we seek to understand the behavior of GNN CIs under controlled covariate and concept
shifts, as well demonstrate the benefits of G–∆UQ in providing reliable estimates under such shifts.
Notably, we expand our evaluation beyond calibration error to include the safety-critical tasks of OOD
detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017; Hendrycks et al., 2019) and generalization gap prediction
tasks (Guillory et al., 2021; Ng et al., 2022; Trivedi et al., 2023a; Garg et al., 2022). We begin by
introducing our data and additional tasks, and then present our results.
Experimental Set-up. In brief, concept shift corresponds to a change in the conditional distribution
of labels given input from the training to evaluation datasets, while covariate shift corresponds to


                                                                                          8
Preprint. Under Review.




                                            Vanilla       DEns         Temp           MCD (high ID MAE truncated in plot)      G- UQ      Pretr. G- UQ

                         GOODCMNIST-color                        GOODMotifLPE-basis                          GOODMotifLPE-size                   GOODSST2-length
              0.0200
                         concept     covariate        0.0040
                                                                 concept      covariate           0.0200
                                                                                                           concept          covariate   0.0200
                                                                                                                                                 concept     covariate
              0.0175                                  0.0035                                      0.0175                                0.0175
              0.0150                                  0.0030                                      0.0150                                0.0150
     ID MAE   0.0125                                  0.0025                                      0.0125                                0.0125
              0.0100                                  0.0020                                      0.0100                                0.0100
              0.0075                                  0.0015                                      0.0075                                0.0075
              0.0050                                  0.0010                                      0.0050                                0.0050
              0.0025                                  0.0005                                      0.0025                                0.0025
              0.0000                                  0.0000                                      0.0000                                0.0000


                   0.4                                                                                                                     0.7
                                                         0.8                                         0.5                                   0.6
                   0.3                                                                               0.4                                   0.5
         OOD MAE




                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                           0.4
                   0.2                                                                               0.3
                                                         0.4                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                           0.2
                   0.1                                   0.2                                         0.1                                   0.1
                   0.0                                   0.0                                         0.0                                   0.0



Figure 6: Generalization Gap Prediction.The mean absolute error when using scores obtained from
different baselines in the challenging (and to the best of our knowledge, yet unexplored for graphs)
task of generalization error prediction are reported. While there is not a dominant method, stochastic
anchoring is very competitive, and yields among the lowest MAE of single-model UQ estimators.
Notably, pretrained G-∆UQ is particularly effective and outperforms the end-to-end variant.


change in the input distribution. We use the recently proposed Graph Out-Of Distribution (GOOD)
benchmark (Gui et al., 2022) to obtain four different datasets (GOODCMNIST, GOODMotif-basis,
GOODMotif-size, GOODSST2) with their corresponding in-/out- of distribution concept and covari-
ate splits. To ensure fair comparison, we use the architectures and hyper-parameters suggested by the
benchmark when training. Please see the supplementary for more details.
We consider the following baseline UQ methods in our analysis: Deep Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan
et al., 2017), Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016), and our proposed G-∆UQ,
including the pretrained variant. DeepEns is well known to be a highly performative baseline on
uncertainty estimation tasks, but we emphasize that it requires training multiple models. This is
in contrast to single model estimators, such as MCD and G-∆UQ. We note that while MCD and
G-∆UQ can be applied at intermediate layers; we present results on the best performing layer but
include the full results in the supplementary.
Using Confidence Estimates in Safety Critical Tasks. The safe deployment of graph machine
learning models in critical applications requires that GNNs not only generalize to ID and OOD
datasets, but that they do so safely. To this end, recent works (Hendrycks et al., 2022b; 2021; Trivedi
et al., 2023b) have expanded model evaluation to include additional robustness metrics to provide
a holistic view of model performance. Notably, while reliable confidence indicators are critical to
success on these metrics, the impact of distributions shift on GNN confidence estimates remains
under-explored. We introduce these additional tasks below.
Generalization Error Prediction: Accurate estimation of the expected generalization error on un-
labeled datasets allows models with unacceptable performance to be pulled from production. To
this end, generalization error predictors (GEPs) (Garg et al., 2022; Ng et al., 2022; Jiang et al.,
2019; Trivedi et al., 2023a; Guillory et al., 2021) which assign sample-level scores, S(xi ) which
are then aggregated into dataset-level error estimates, have become popular. We use maximum
softmax probability and a simple thresholding mechanism as the GEP (since we are interested in
understanding the behavior of confidence indicators), and report the error between the predicted and
true target dataset accuracy:
                                                                                                     1 X
                                      GEP Error := ||Acctarget −                                          I(S(x̄i ; F) > τ )||
                                                                                                    |X| i

where τ is tuned by minimizing GEP error on the validation dataset. We use the confidences obtained
by the different baselines as sample-level scores, S(xi ) corresponding to the model’s expectation that
a sample is correct. The MAE between the estimated error and true error is reported on both in- and
out-of -distribution test splits provided by the GOOD benchmark.


                                                                                             9
Preprint. Under Review.




               GOODCMNIST-color                   GOODMotifLPE-basis                       GOODMotifLPE-size                        GOODSST2-length
                                             Vanilla       DEns         Temp             MCD         G- UQ         Pretr. G- UQ
        0.80
               concept     covariate   0.8
                                                 concept          covariate        1.0
                                                                                           concept           covariate       0.50
                                                                                                                                    concept     covariate
        0.75
                                       0.7                                                                                   0.45
                                                                                   0.9
        0.70
                                       0.6                                                                                   0.40
        0.65                                                                       0.8
AUROC




        0.60                           0.5                                                                                   0.35

        0.55                                                                       0.7
                                       0.4                                                                                   0.30
        0.50
                                                                                   0.6
                                       0.3                                                                                   0.25
        0.45

        0.40                           0.2                                         0.5                                       0.20


Figure 7: OOD Detection. The AUROC is reported for the task of detecting out-of-distribution
samples. Under concept shift, the proposed G-∆UQ variants are very competitive with other
baselines, including DeepEns. Under covariate shifts, except for GOODMotif-basis, pretrained
G-∆UQ produces significant improvements over all baselines, including end-to-end G-∆UQ training.



Out-of-Distribution Detection: By reliably detecting OOD samples and abstaining from making
predictions, models can avoid over extrapolating to distributions which are not relevant. While many
scores have been proposed for detection (Hendrycks et al., 2019; 2022a; Lee et al., 2018; Wang
et al., 2022a; Liu et al., 2020), flexible, popular baselines, such as maximum softmax probability
and predictive entropy (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017), can be derived from confidence indicators
relying upon prediction probabilities. Here, we report the AUROC for the binary classification task
of detecting OOD samples using the maximum softmax probability (Kirchheim et al., 2022).
We briefly note that while more sophisticated scores can be used, our focus is on the reliability of GNN
confidence indicators and thus we choose scores directly related to those estimates. Moreover, since
sophisticated scores can often be derived from prediction probabilities, we expect their performance
would also be improved with better estimates.
Results. We report the results in Figs. 5, 6, and 7. Our observations are below. Results are reported
over three seeds.
Accuracy & Calibration. In Fig. 5, we observe that using stochastic anchoring via G-∆UQ yields
competitive accuracy, especially in comparison to other single-model methods such as MCD, temper-
ature scaling, or the base GNN model: in-distribution accuracy is higher on 6 out of 8 dataset/shift
combinations, and out-of-distribution accuracy is higher on 5 out of 8 combinations. While Deep En-
sembles is the most accurate method on a majority of datasets, they are known to be computationally
expensive. Moreover, the simpler stochastic anchoring procedure generally comes close to the accu-
racy of Deep Ensembles, and in a few cases (covariate shift on GOODCMNIST and GOODMotif-size
datasets), can noticeably outperform it. Stochastic anchoring also excels in improving calibration,
improving in-distribution calibration compared to all baselines on 4 out of 8 combinations. Most
importantly, out-of-distribution calibration error is decreased by stochastic anchoring on 7 of 8
dataset/shift combinations compared to all other methods (single-model or ensemble).
Generalization Gap Prediction. Next, we study all of our methods on the GOOD benchmarks for the
task of generalization gap prediction, and report the results in Fig. 6. On this challenging task, there
is no clear winner across all benchmarks. However, G-∆UQ varaints are consistently competitive
in MAE, and yield among the lowest MAE (across the board lower than other single-model UQ
methods). In particular, the pretrained G-∆UQ variant produces on average the lowest MAE for
generalization gap estimation.
OOD Detection. Finally, we consider the task of detecting out-of-distribution samples. In Fig. 7,
we see that the performance of stochastic anchoring methods under concept shift is generally very
competitive with other UQ methods. For covariate shifts, except for the GOODMotif-basis dataset,
stochastic anchoring produces high AUROC scores. In particular, on the GOODCMNIST-color,
GOODSST2-length and GOODMotif-size benchmarks, the pretrained variant of G-∆UQ produces
significantly improved AUROC scores. Finally, on GOODMotif-basis, however, both have lower


                                                                              10
Preprint. Under Review.




AUROC than other baselines; we suspect the reason for this to be the inherent simplicity of this
dataset and that G-∆UQ was prone to shortcuts.
Overall, we find that G-∆UQ performs competitively across several tasks and distributions shifts,
validating our approach as an effective mechanism for producing reliable confidence indicators.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we take a closer look at confidence estimation under distribution shifts in the context of
graph neural networks. We begin by demonstrating that techniques for improving GNN expressivity,
such as transformer architectures and using positional encodings, do not necessarily improve the
estimation performance on a simple structural distortion shift benchmark. To this end, we seek to
improve the uncertainty estimation of GNNs by adapting the principle of stochastic anchoring for
discrete, structured settings. We propose several G-∆UQ variants, and demonstrate the benefits of
partial stochasticity when estimating uncertainty. Our evaluation is extensive, spanning multiple
types of distribution shift (size, concept, covariate) while considering multiple safety critical tasks
that require reliable estimates (calibration, generalization gap prediction, and OOD detection.) The
proposed G-∆UQ improves estimation performance on a number of tasks, while remaining scalable.
Overall, our paper rigorously studies uncertainty estimation for GNNs, identifies several shortcomings
in existing approaches and proposes a flexible framework for reliable estimation. In future work, we
will extend our framework to support link prediction and node classification tasks, as well as provide
an automated mechanism for creating partially stochastic GNNs.

7    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-07NA27344, Lawrence Livermore
National Security, LLC and is partially supported by the LLNL-LDRD Program under Project
No. 2-ERD-006. This work is also partially supported by the National Science Foundation under
CAREER Grant No. IIS 1845491, Army Young Investigator Award No. W9-11NF1810397, and
Adobe, Amazon, Facebook, and Google faculty awards. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed here are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of funding
parties. PT thanks Ekdeep Singh Lubana and Vivek Sivaraman for useful discussions during the
course of this project.




                                                  11
Preprint. Under Review.




R EFERENCES
Radhakrishna Achanta, Appu Shaji, Kevin Smith, Aurélien Lucchi, Pascal Fua, and Sabine Süsstrunk.
  SLIC superpixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
  Mach. Intell., 2012.

Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications.
  In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Beatrice Bevilacqua, Yangze Zhou, and Bruno Ribeiro. Size-invariant graph representations for graph
  classification extrapolations. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.

Charles Blundell, Julien Cornebise, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Daan Wierstra. Weight uncertainty in
  neural network. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.

Davide Buffelli, Pietro Liò, and Fabio Vandin. Sizeshiftreg: a regularization method for improving
  size-generalization in graph neural networks. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Yongqiang Chen, Yonggang Zhang, Yatao Bian, Han Yang, Kaili Ma, Binghui Xie, Tongliang Liu,
  Bo Han, and James Cheng. Learning causally invariant representations for out-of-distribution
  generalization on graphs. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022.

Ching-Yao Chuang and Stefanie Jegelka. Tree mover’s distance: Bridging graph metrics and stability
  of graph neural networks. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems NeurIPS, 2022.

Gabriele Corso, Luca Cavalleri, Dominique Beaini, Pietro Liò, and Petar Velickovic. Principal
  neighbourhood aggregation for graph nets. In NeurIPS, 2020.

Nicki Skafte Detlefsen, Jiri Borovec, Justus Schock, Ananya Harsh, Teddy Koker, Luca Di Liello,
  Daniel Stancl, Changsheng Quan, Maxim Grechkin, and William Falcon. Torchmetrics - mea-
  suring reproducibility in pytorch, 2022. URL https://github.com/Lightning-AI/
  torchmetrics.

Mucong Ding, Kezhi Kong, Jiuhai Chen, John Kirchenbauer, Micah Goldblum, David Wipf, Furong
 Huang, and Tom Goldstein. A closer look at distribution shifts and out-of-distribution general-
 ization on graphs. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Distribution Shifts: Connecting Methods and
 Applications, 2021.

Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Chaitanya K. Joshi, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and Xavier Bresson.
  Benchmarking graph neural networks. CoRR, 2020.

Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Anh Tuan Luu, Thomas Laurent, Yoshua Bengio, and Xavier Bresson. Graph
  neural networks with learnable structural and positional representations. In Proc. Int. Conf. on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022a.

Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Ladislav Rampásek, Michael Galkin, Ali Parviz, Guy Wolf, Anh Tuan
  Luu, and Dominique Beaini. Long range graph benchmark. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information
  Processing Systems NeurIPS, Datasets and Benchmark Track, 2022b.

Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model
  uncertainty in deep learning. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.

Saurabh Garg, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, Zachary C. Lipton, Behnam Neyshabur, and Hanie Sedghi.
  Leveraging unlabeled data to predict out-of-distribution performance. In Proc. Int. Conf. on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.

Thomas Gaudelet, Ben Day, Arian R. Jamasb, Jyothish Soman, Cristian Regep, Gertrude Liu, Jeremy
  B. R. Hayter, Richard Vickers, Charles Roberts, Jian Tang, David Roblin, Tom L. Blundell,
  Michael M. Bronstein, and Jake P. Taylor-King. Utilising graph machine learning within drug
  discovery and development. CoRR, abs/2012.05716, 2020.


                                                12
Preprint. Under Review.




Shurui Gui, Xiner Li, Limei Wang, and Shuiwang Ji. GOOD: A graph out-of-distribution benchmark.
  In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Benchmark Track, 2022.
Devin Guillory, Vaishaal Shankar, Sayna Ebrahimi, Trevor Darrell, and Ludwig Schmidt. Predicting
  with confidence on unseen distributions. In ICCV, 2021.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Machine Learning, (ICML), 2017.
Xiaoxin He, Bryan Hooi, Thomas Laurent, Adam Perold, Yann LeCun, and Xavier Bresson. A
  generalization of vit/mlp-mixer to graphs. CoRR, abs/2212.13350, 2022.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. A baseline for detecting misclassified and out-of-distribution
  examples in neural networks. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas G. Dietterich. Deep anomaly detection with outlier
  exposure. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Unsolved problems in ML
  safety. CoRR, abs/2109.13916, 2021.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Mantas Mazeika, Andy Zou, Joseph Kwon, Mohammadreza Mosta-
  jabi, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. Scaling out-of-distribution detection for real-world settings.
  In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022a.
Dan Hendrycks, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Leonard Tang, Bo Li, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.
  Pixmix: Dreamlike pictures comprehensively improve safety measures. In Proc. Int. Conf. on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022b.
Hans Hao-Hsun Hsu, Yuesong Shen, Christian Tomani, and Daniel Cremers. What makes graph
  neural networks miscalibrated? In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems NeurIPS,
  2022.
Yiding Jiang, Dilip Krishnan, Hossein Mobahi, and Samy Bengio. Predicting the generalization
  gap in deep networks with margin distributions. In 7th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019.
Jian Kang, Qinghai Zhou, and Hanghang Tong. Jurygcn: Quantifying jackknife uncertainty on graph
   convolutional networks. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD, 2022.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In ICLR, 2017.
Konstantin Kirchheim, Marco Filax, and Frank Ortmeier. Pytorch-ood: A library for out-of-
  distribution detection based on pytorch. In Workshop at the Proc. Int. Conf. on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition CVPR, 2022.
Boris Knyazev, Graham W. Taylor, and Mohamed R. Amer. Understanding attention and generaliza-
  tion in graph neural networks. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2019.
Ananya Kumar, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. Verified uncertainty calibration. In Proc. Adv. in
 Neural Information Processing Systems NeurIPS, 2019.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Kimin Lee, Kibok Lee, Honglak Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. A simple unified framework for detecting
  out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing
  Systems NeurIPS, 2018.
Pan Li, Yanbang Wang, Hongwei Wang, and Jure Leskovec. Distance encoding: Design prov-
  ably more powerful neural networks for graph representation learning. In Proc. Adv. in Neural
  Information Processing Systems NeurIPS, 2020.


                                                 13
Preprint. Under Review.




Weitang Liu, Xiaoyun Wang, John D. Owens, and Yixuan Li. Energy-based out-of-distribution
 detection. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems NeurIPS, 2020.

Matthias Minderer, Josip Djolonga, Rob Romijnders, Frances Hubis, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby,
 Dustin Tran, and Mario Lucic. Revisiting the calibration of modern neural networks. In Proc. Adv.
 in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Christopher Morris, Nils M. Kriege, Franka Bause, Kristian Kersting, Petra Mutzel, and Marion
  Neumann. Tudataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs. In ICML
  2020 Workshop on Graph Representation Learning and Beyond (GRL+ 2020), 2020. URL
  www.graphlearning.io.

Luis Müller, Mikhail Galkin, Christopher Morris, and Ladislav Rampásek. Attending to graph
  transformers. CoRR, abs/2302.04181, 2023.

Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory F. Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated
 probabilities using bayesian binning. In Proc. Conf. on Adv. of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2015.

Aviv Netanyahu, Abhishek Gupta, Max Simchowitz, Kaiqing Zhang, and Pulkit Agrawal. Learning
  to extrapolate: A transductive approach. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2023.

Nathan Ng, Neha Hulkund, Kyunghyun Cho, and Marzyeh Ghassemi. Predicting out-of-domain
  generalization with local manifold smoothness. CoRR, abs/2207.02093, 2022.

Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, D. Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua Dillon,
  Balaji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? evaluating
  predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems
  NeurIPS, 2019.

Ladislav Rampášek, Mikhail Galkin, Vijay Prakash Dwivedi, Anh Tuan Luu, Guy Wolf, and Do-
  minique Beaini. Recipe for a General, Powerful, Scalable Graph Transformer. In Proc. Adv. in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Mrinank Sharma, Sebastian Farquhar, Eric Nalisnick, and Tom Rainforth. Do bayesian neural
 networks need to be fully stochastic? In AISTATS, 2023.

Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan, Rushil Anirudh, Vivek Narayanaswamy, and Peer-Timo Bremer. Single
  model uncertainty estimation via stochastic data centering. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Jake Topping, Francesco Di Giovanni, Benjamin Paul Chamberlain, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on graphs via curvature. In Proc. Int.
  Conf. on Learning Representations ICLR, 2022.

Puja Trivedi, Danai Koutra, and Jayaraman J Thiagarajan. A closer look at scoring functions and
  generalization prediction. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2023a.

Puja Trivedi, Danai Koutra, and Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan. A closer look at model adaptation using
  feature distortion and simplicity bias. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2023b.

Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In ICLR, 2018.

Haoqi Wang, Zhizhong Li, Litong Feng, and Wayne Zhang. Vim: Out-of-distribution with virtual-
  logit matching. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022a.

Haorui Wang, Haoteng Yin, Muhan Zhang, and Pan Li. Equivariant and stable positional encoding
  for more powerful graph neural networks. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2022b.


                                                 14
Preprint. Under Review.




Xiao Wang, Hongrui Liu, Chuan Shi, and Cheng Yang. Be confident! towards trustworthy graph
  neural networks via confidence calibration. In Proc. Adv. in Neural Information Processing Systems
  NeurIPS, 2021.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A Fine-Grained Analysis on Distribution Shift. In Proc. Int.
  Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2019.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Stefanie Jegelka, and Kenji Kawaguchi. Optimization of graph neural
  networks: Implicit acceleration by skip connections and more depth. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2021.
Yujun Yan, Jiong Zhu, Marlena Duda, Eric Solarz, Chandra Sekhar Sripada, and Danai Koutra.
  Groupinn: Grouping-based interpretable neural network for classification of limited, noisy brain
  data. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD, 2019.
Jianwei Yang, Jiasen Lu, Stefan Lee, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Graph R-CNN for scene graph
   generation. In Proc. Euro. Conf. on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Gilad Yehudai, Ethan Fetaya, Eli Meirom, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron. From local structures to
  size generalization in graph neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 11975–11986. PMLR, 2021.
Muhan Zhang and Yixin Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. In Proc. Adv. in
 Neural Information Processing Systems NeurIPS, 2018.
Lingxiao Zhao, Wei Jin, Leman Akoglu, and Neil Shah. From stars to subgraphs: Uplifting any GNN
  with local structure awareness. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yuanqi Du, Yinkai Wang, Yichen Xu, Jieyu Zhang, Qiang Liu, and Shu Wu. A survey
  on deep graph generation: Methods and applications. In Learning on Graphs Conference (LoG),
  2022.




                                                15
Preprint. Under Review.




A                A PPENDIX

A.1                  D ETAILS ON S UPER - PIXEL E XPERIMENTS

We provide an example of the rotated images and corresponding super-pixel graphs in Fig. 8, as well
as additional resulting using the GINE backbone.


                                            Rot: 0°               Rot: 10°                  Rot: 15°




                                           Rot: 25°               Rot: 35°                  Rot: 40°




                                           Rot: 60°               Rot: 90°                  Rot: 180°




Figure 8: Rotated Super-pixel MNIST. Rotating images prior to creating super-pixels to leads
to some structural distortion Ding et al.. We can see that the class-discriminative information is
preserved, despite rotation. This allows for simulating different levels of distribution shifts, while
still ensuring that samples are valid.




               1.0
               0.9                                    G UQ-GINE-LPE
                                                      MPNN-GINE-LPE             0.4
               0.8
Accuracy ( )




                                                                                0.3
               0.7
                                                                      ECE ( )




               0.6                                                              0.2
               0.5
                                                                                0.1
               0.4
               0.3                                                              0.0
               1.0
               0.9                                       G UQ-GINE
                                                         MPNN-GINE              0.4
               0.8
Accuracy ( )




               0.7                                                              0.3
                                                                      ECE ( )




               0.6                                                              0.2
               0.5
                                                                                0.1
               0.4
               0.3                                                              0.0
                       0°   10° 15° 25° 35° 40° 60° 90° 180°                          0°   10° 15° 25° 35° 40° 60° 90° 180°
                                     Dataset Shift

Figure 9: Rotated Super-pixel MNIST, GINE Backbone. We report additional results for perfor-
mance on rotated-superpixel MNIST using a GINE backbone and READOUT stochastic ancoring.
While G-∆UQ does lose some accuracy, we see at higher levels of distortion, that it is significantly
better calibrated.



                                                                      16
Preprint. Under Review.




A.2     S TOCHASTIC C ENTERING ON THE E MPRICAL NTK OF G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS

Using a simple grid-graph dataset and 4 layer GIN model, we compute the Fourier spectrum of the
NTK. As shown in Fig. 10, we find that shifts to the node features can induce systematic changes to
the spectrum.

              Input Shift    G- UQ (input)   G- UQ (1)       G- UQ (2)        G- UQ (3)        G- UQ (4) G- UQ (READOUT)
       102
       101
       100
      10 1
      10 2
      10 3


      0.000         0.100         0.200      0.300       0.400        0.500        0.600        0.700       0.800    0.900

Figure 10: Stochastic Centering with the empirical GNN NTK. We find that performing constant
shifts at intermediate layers introduces changes to a GNN’s NTK. We include a vanilla GNN NTK in
black for reference. Further, note the shape of the spectrum should not be compared across subplots
as each subplot was created with a different random initialization.


A.3     DATASET S TATISTICS

The statistics for the size generalization experiments (see Sec. 5.1) are provided below in Table 1.

Table 1: Size Generalization Dataset Statistics: This table is directly reproduced from (Buffelli
et al., 2022), who in turn used statistics from (Yehudai et al., 2021; Bevilacqua et al., 2021).
                                             NCI1                                                NCI109
                               ALL    S MALLEST 50%      L ARGEST 10%            ALL       S MALLEST 50%    L ARGEST 10%
  C LASS A                  49.95%           62.30%            19.17%         49.62%              62.04%          21.37%
  C LASS B                  50.04%           37.69%            80.82%         50.37%              37.95%          78.62%
  # OF GRAPHS                 4110             2157                412          4127                2079              421
  AVG GRAPH SIZE                 29               20                61             29                  20              61

                                           PROTEINS                                                DD
                               ALL    S MALLEST 50% L ARGEST 10%                 ALL       S MALLEST 50%    L ARGEST 10%
  C LASS A                  59.56%           41.97%       90.17%              58.65%              35.47%          79.66%
  C LASS B                  40.43%           58.02%        9.82%              41.34%              64.52%          20.33%
  # OF GRAPHS                 1113               567          112               1178                  592             118
  AVG GRAPH SIZE                 39               15          138                284                  144             746


A.4     L AYER S ELECTION S IZE G ENERALIZATION

As discussed in Sec. 5.1, the choice of anchoring layer can have a disparate effect on the accuracy
and calibration of a dataset. For example, in Fig. 11, we see that while the choice of layer is very
influential for DD, it is significantly less important for the other datasets. However, overall, we see
that anchoring after READOUT leads to good performance.

A.5     GOOD B ENCHMARK E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

For our experiments in Sec. 5.2, we utilize the in/out-of-distribution covariate and concept splits
provided by Gui et al. (2022). Furthermore, we use the suggested models and architectures provided
by their package. In brief, we use GIN models with virtual nodes (except for GOODMotif) for
training, and average scores over 3 seeds. When performing stochastic anchoring at a particular layer,
we double the hidden representation size for that layer. Subsequent layers retain the original size of
the vanilla model.
We use 10 samples when computing uncertainties using Monte Carlo Dropout, and manually set
individual layers to “train" in order to perform layer-wise dropout. When performing stochastic


                                                                 17
Preprint. Under Review.




Table 2: Size Generalization. The results for the size generalization experiments are reported. Note,
we report standard deviation over 10 seeds.

                                                                     GCN                                                        GIN                                                    PNA
Dataset            Model           Layer      Accuracy (↑)                  ECE (↓)                    Accuracy (↑)                     ECE (↓)                  Accuracy (↑)                  ECE (↓)
DD                 G-∆UQ              1       0.0926 ± 0.014                0.5949 ± 0.018             0.5119 ± 0.291                   0.2755 ± 0.173           0.2551 ± 0.185                0.451 ± 0.146
                                      2       0.1002 ± 0.040                0.5899 ± 0.049             0.6491 ± 0.174                   0.2038 ± 0.086           0.4552 ± 0.235                0.3268 ± 0.143
                                      3       0.7948 ± 0.127                0.0951 ± 0.102             0.7686 ± 0.130                   0.1155 ± 0.078           0.6804 ± 0.185                0.1533 ± 0.099
                   GNN               NA       0.671 ± 0.132                 0.20925 ± 0.081            0.729 ± 0.119                    0.186 ± 0.071            0.607 ± 0.189                 0.245 ± 0.107
NCI1               G-∆UQ              1       0.5983 ± 0.1043               0.2226 ± 0.0636            0.6253 ± 0.0423                  0.2542 ± 0.0319          0.6388 ± 0.0358               0.2342 ± 0.0310
                                      2       0.5793 ± 0.0509               0.2318 ± 0.0616            0.6389 ± 0.0563                  0.2368 ± 0.0796          0.6069 ± 0.0402               0.2989 ± 0.0377
                                      3       0.6521 ± 0.0799               0.1081 ± 0.0185            0.6308 ± 0.0370                  0.2294 ± 0.0647          0.5924 ± 0.0568               0.2849 ± 0.0837
                   GNN               NA       0.557 ± 0.027                 0.163 ± 0.023              0.6339 ± 0.063                   0.2776 ± 0.0512          0.597 ± 0.0636                0.3309 ± 0.0643
NCI109             G-∆UQ              1       0.6658 ± 0.070                0.1705 ± 0.057             0.6003 ± 0.070                   0.2774 ± 0.074           0.6498 ± 0.029                0.2346 ± 0.043
                                      2       0.6461 ± 0.0818               0.1895 ± 0.0753            0.6082 ± 0.0357                  0.2833 ± 0.0493          0.6218 ± 0.0386               0.2415 ± 0.0483
                                      3       0.6459 ± 0.052                0.1906 ± 0.045             0.5626 ± 0.031                   0.3477 ± 0.056           0.6043 ± 0.064                0.2711 ± 0.095
                   GNN               NA       0.6654 ± 0.032                0.2244 ± 0.046             0.5921 ± 0.037                   0.3324 ± 0.042           0.6117 ± 0.034                0.3294 ± 0.027
PROTEINS           G-∆UQ              1       0.7273 ± 0.187                0.1573 ± 0.138             0.7227 ± 0.048                   0.1448 ± 0.045           0.6859 ± 0.120                0.1825 ± 0.085
                                      2       0.7538 ± 0.070                0.1314 ± 0.051             0.7103 ± 0.066                   0.1423 ± 0.038           0.6425 ± 0.102                0.2007 ± 0.074
                                      3       0.7301 ± 0.105                0.1339 ± 0.067             0.704 ± 0.0454                   0.1805 ± 0.076           0.7301 ± 0.087                0.1391 ± 0.067
                   GNN               NA       0.7358 ± 0.070                0.1886 ± 0.046             0.7065 ± 0.060                   0.1907 ± 0.061           0.7141 ± 0.124                0.1905 ± 0.080


                            DD                                                 NCI1                                                     NCI109                                            PROTEINS
             GCN            GIN            PNA                GCN               GIN             PNA                  GCN                GIN             PNA               GCN              GIN             PNA
      0.5
Acc




      0.0
      0.5
ECE




      0.0 L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A          L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A                  L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A             L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A L1 L2 L3 N/A
        G- UQ Layer

Figure 11: Effect of Anchoring Layer on Performance. Performing stochastic anchoring at different
layers leads to sampling of different inductive biases and hypothesis spaces. Here, we see that the
choice of anchoring layer is important to the the D&D dataset, but is not as influential on the other
datasets. Given that last-layer anchoring generally performs well, we suggest performing stochastic
anchoring in the last-layer when models are expected to encounter size distribution shifts.


anchoring, we use 10 fixed anchors randomly drawn from the in-distribution validation dataset. We
also train the G-∆UQ for an additional 50 epochs to ensure that models are able to converge. Please
see our code repository for the full details.




Table 3: RotMNIST-Accuracy. Here, we report expanded results (accuracy) on the Rotated MNIST
dataset, including a variant that combines G-∆UQ with Deep Ens. Notably, we see that anchored
ensembles outperform basic ensembles in both accuracy and calibration.
MODEL              G-∆UQ?   LPE?      Avg. Test (↑)       Acc. (10) (↑)        Acc. (15) (↑)      Acc. (25) (↑)         Acc. (35) (↑)         Acc. (40) (↑)      Acc. (60) (↑)       Acc. (90) (↑)     Acc. (180) (↑)
                     ✗        ✗     0.94716 ± 0.0022    0.9179 ± 0.00186     0.9042 ± 0.00475   0.82854 ± 0.0089      0.73846 ± 0.0094     0.67866 ± 0.0072    0.61312 ± 0.0076    0.6167 ± 0.00786   0.44318 ± 0.0086
GatedGCN
                     ✓        ✗     0.93346 ± 0.0148    0.89386 ± 0.0188     0.87784 ± 0.0198   0.7942 ± 0.03196      0.69786 ± 0.0359     0.63652 ± 0.0484    0.57184 ± 0.0511    0.57668 ± 0.0495   0.43592 ± 0.0346
GatedGCN-DENS        ✗        ✗     0.96284 ± 0.0002    0.94354 ± 0.0011     0.93282 ± 0.0008   0.8739 ± 0.00164      0.79438 ± 0.0016     0.73104 ± 0.00188   0.66318 ± 0.0017    0.65508 ± 0.0015          –
GatedGCN-DENS        ✓        ✗     0.94926 ± 0.0077    0.92164 ± 0.0079     0.90704 ± 0.0115   0.82832 ± 0.0203      0.73264 ± 0.0318     0.66218 ± 0.04640   0.59134 ± 0.0483    0.60084 ± 0.0371          –
                     ✗       ✓      0.9492 ± 0.00253    0.91738 ± 0.0039     0.90438 ± 0.0048   0.82954 ± 0.0068      0.74394 ± 0.0072     0.68526 ± 0.0056    0.61678 ± 0.0070    0.61624 ± 0.0141   0.44876 ± 0.0054
GatedGCN
                     ✓       ✓      0.91504 ± 0.0317    0.87188 ± 0.0382     0.85232 ± 0.0414   0.7765 ± 0.03866      0.67986 ± 0.0374     0.63098 ± 0.0329    0.57416 ± 0.0264    0.57752 ± 0.0390   0.45314 ± 0.0182
GatedGCN-DENS        ✗       ✓      0.96478 ± 0.0007    0.9432 ± 0.0009      0.9331 ± 0.00149   0.87338 ± 0.0015      0.79212 ± 0.0040     0.73576 ± 0.00280   0.66182 ± 0.0027    0.65746 ± 0.0047          –
GatedGCN-DENS        ✓       ✓      0.95364 ± 0.0054    0.92996 ± 0.0096     0.91758 ± 0.0115   0.85044 ± 0.0226      0.75906 ± 0.0254     0.69632 ± 0.03247   0.62482 ± 0.0324    0.62696 ± 0.0294          –
                     ✗       ✓       0.9698 ± 0.0010     0.9485 ± 0.0006     0.9383 ± 0.0015     0.8729 ± 0.0060      0.7705 ± 0.0129       0.6877 ± 0.0094     0.5829 ± 0.0171    0.5117 ± 0.0231    0.4219 ± 0.0212
GPS
                     ✓       ✓        0.969 ± 0.0011     0.9461 ± 0.0032     0.9372 ± 0.0028     0.8695 ± 0.0035      0.7694 ± 0.0122       0.6791 ± 0.0143     0.5633 ± 0.0192    0.4911 ± 0.0542    0.4470 ± 0.0221
GPS-DENS             ✗       ✓          0.9805 ± 0          0.9693 ± 0          0.9609 ± 0          0.9129 ± 0           0.8342 ± 0            0.7498 ± 0          0.6465 ± 0         0.5703 ± 0             –
GPS-DENS             ✓       ✓      0.977825 ± 0.0006   0.96315 ± 0.00050   0.953425 ± 0.0001   0.90515 ± 0.00029    0.8221 ± 0.001999    0.736275 ± 0.00314   0.62515 ± 0.00370   0.5378 ± 0.0152           –
GPS (Pretrained)     ✓       ✓       0.9673 ± 0.0020     0.9453 ± 0.0041     0.9341 ± 0.0051     0.8642 ± 0.0094      0.7595 ± 0.0104       0.6744 ± 0.0016     0.5728 ± 0.0008    0.5252 ± 0.0151    0.4298 ± 0.0440




                                                                                                      18
Preprint. Under Review.




Table 4: RotMNIST-Calibration. Here, we report expanded results (calibration) on the Rotated
MNIST dataset, including a variant that combines G-∆UQ with Deep Ens. Notably, we see that
anchored ensembles outperform basic ensembles in both accuracy and calibration.
MODEL              G-∆UQ   LPE?     Avg.ECE (↓)         ECE (10) (↓)        ECE (15) (↓)        ECE (25) (↓)        ECE (35) (↓)         ECE (40) (↓)        ECE (60) (↓)         ECE (90) (↓)       ECE (180) (↓)
                    ✗       ✗     0.03778 ± 0.0015     0.05862 ± 0.0012   0.06804 ± 0.3402     0.12622 ± 0.0085   0.19502 ± 0.0118     0.24554 ± 0.0109    0.3011 ± 0.01314     0.3033 ± 0.01035    0.48996 ± 0.0132
GatedGCN
                    ✓       ✗     0.0181 ± 0.00847    0.02924 ± 0.0129    0.03274 ± 0.1637     0.06878 ± 0.0335   0.1167 ± 0.04773    0.16182 ± 0.0666     0.2131 ± 0.08091     0.22288 ± 0.0755    0.38428 ± 0.0586
GatedGCN-TEMP       ✗       ✗     0.03488 ± 0.00155   0.05434 ± 0.00205   0.0624 ± 0.002965   0.11856 ± 0.00666   0.18548 ± 0.00595   0.23334 ± 0.00851   0.28842 ± 0.01233    0.2915 ± 0.010884           –
GatedGCN-DENS       ✗       ✗     0.02574 ± 0.00027   0.03794 ± 0.00157   0.04254 ± 0.00115   0.08418 ± 0.00226   0.13482 ± 0.00103   0.18492 ± 0.00280   0.2375 ± 0.001238    0.25494 ± 0.00179           –
GatedGCN-DENS       ✓       ✗     0.01458 ± 0.00324   0.0185 ± 0.005383   0.02094 ± 0.00503   0.03638 ± 0.01210   0.06902 ± 0.03249   0.11416 ± 0.05638   0.16408 ± 0.07113    0.1664 ± 0.055580           –
                    ✗       ✓     0.0364 ± 0.00305    0.05882 ± 0.0025    0.06804 ± 0.3402    0.12512 ± 0.0059    0.19148 ± 0.0070     0.2399 ± 0.00766    0.29732 ± 0.0087     0.30304 ± 0.0152    0.4863 ± 0.00851
GatedGCN
                    ✓       ✓     0.0218 ± 0.00673    0.02856 ± 0.0140    0.03386 ± 0.1693    0.06246 ± 0.0223    0.10884 ± 0.0187     0.14068 ± 0.0191    0.17554 ± 0.0214     0.1971 ± 0.04935    0.3264 ± 0.05404
GatedGCN-Temp       ✗       ✓     0.03316 ± 0.0023    0.0531 ± 0.00185    0.0614 ± 0.00433    0.1161 ± 0.00506    0.17878 ± 0.0059     0.22476 ± 0.0049    0.28026 ± 0.0071     0.28656 ± 0.0135           –
GatedGCN-DENS       ✗       ✓     0.02376 ± 0.0007    0.03784 ± 0.0010    0.0426 ± 0.00184    0.08358 ± 0.0012    0.13894 ± 0.0038     0.18088 ± 0.0025    0.2371 ± 0.00228     0.24934 ± 0.0053           –
GatedGCN-DENS       ✓       ✓     0.01686 ± 0.0024    0.02406 ± 0.0055    0.0274 ± 0.00766    0.02976 ± 0.0042    0.0364 ± 0.01213     0.0587 ± 0.03265    0.08836 ± 0.0429     0.11634 ± 0.0310           –
                    ✗       ✓       0.026 ± 0.0013    0.0437 ± 0.0009     0.0519 ± 0.1559      0.1076 ± 0.0057    0.1974 ± 0.0124      0.2727 ± 0.0084      0.3657 ± 0.0160      0.4336 ± 0.0236    0.5391 ± 0.0247
GPS
                    ✓       ✓      0.0221 ± 0.0013     0.037 ± 0.0055      0.0442 ± 0.1327     0.0907 ± 0.0084    0.1649 ± 0.0183      0.2387 ± 0.0178      0.3347 ± 0.0268      0.4013 ± 0.0539    0.4771 ± 0.0222
GPS (Pretrained)    ✓       ✓      0.0207 ± 0.0013    0.0323 ± 0.0028     0.0386 ± 0.1159      0.0827 ± 0.0019    0.1531 ± 0.0072      0.2169 ± 0.0121      0.2906 ± 0.0164      0.3320 ± 0.0257    0.4648 ± 0.0643
GPS-TEMP            ✗       ✓     0.02443 ± 0.0008     0.04113 ± 0.001    0.0486 ± 0.00059    0.10163 ± 0.00624   0.1878 ± 0.01192    0.26073 ± 0.00822    0.35056 ± 0.01544    0.417 ± 0.023251           –
GPS-DENS            ✗       ✓      0.0163 ± 0.0012     0.026 ± 0.0022         0.0298 ± 0          0.0658 ± 0         0.1233 ± 0           0.1952 ± 0           0.2747 ± 0           0.3438 ± 0             –
GPS-DENS            ✓       ✓     0.01425 ± 0.00014   0.0233 ± 0.00199    0.027425 ± 0.003     0.05505 ± 0.0041   0.10325 ± 0.0056     0.16435 ± 0.0060   0.243775 ± 0.00575   0.319925 ± 0.00235          –




                                              Table 5: GOODCMNIST-color, shifttype: concept
  Method                             ID Acc                                       OOD Acc                                          ID Cal                                       OOD Cal
  Vanilla                            89.66 ± 0.28                            49.88 ± 0.28                             0.1241 ± 0.0042                                  0.4392 ± 0.0779
  Dens                               90.64 ± 0.08                            50.51 ± 0.08                             0.1240 ± 0.0038                                  0.4368 ± 0.0825
  Temp                               89.66 ± 0.28                            49.88 ± 0.28                             0.1189 ± 0.0053                                  0.4215 ± 0.0744
  MCD                                89.96 ± 0.39                            49.89 ± 0.39                             0.1224 ± 0.0062                                  0.4387 ± 0.0806
  G-∆UQ                              89.88 ± 0.15                            49.73 ± 0.15                            0.0658 ± 0.0051                                  0.3343 ± 0.0660
  Pretr. G-∆UQ                       89.92 ± 0.58                            48.71 ± 0.58                             0.0867 ± 0.0099                                  0.3874 ± 0.0766


                                            Table 6: GOODCMNIST-color, shifttype: covariate
  Method                             ID Acc                                       OOD Acc                                          ID Cal                                       OOD Cal
  Vanilla                            76.19 ± 0.44                            34.84 ± 0.44                             0.1846 ± 0.0071                                  0.5507 ± 0.1473
  Dens                               79.36 ± 0.07                            39.68 ± 0.07                             0.1583 ± 0.0038                                  0.4954 ± 0.1773
  Temp                               76.19 ± 0.44                            34.84 ± 0.44                             0.1587 ± 0.0080                                  0.5271 ± 0.1526
  MCD                                76.27 ± 0.59                            35.02 ± 0.59                             0.1749 ± 0.0094                                  0.5437 ± 0.1522
  G-∆UQ                              76.83 ± 0.41                            35.46 ± 0.41                            0.0643 ± 0.0063                                  0.4233 ± 0.1723
  Pretr. G-∆UQ                       75.52 ± 4.27                            38.05 ± 4.27                             0.0724 ± 0.0223                                  0.4949 ± 0.1755


                                             Table 7: GOODMotifLPE-basis, shifttype: concept
  Method                             ID Acc                                      OOD Acc                                           ID Cal                                        OOD Cal
  Vanilla                            99.54 ± 0.08                           92.52 ± 0.08                            0.0356 ± 0.0020                                     0.0954 ± 0.0144
  Dens                               99.59 ± 0.00                           93.24 ± 0.00                           0.0297 ± 0.00033                                     0.0863 ± 0.0158
  Temp                               99.54 ± 0.08                           92.52 ± 0.08                            0.0347 ± 0.0009                                     0.0910 ± 0.0143
  MCD                                99.54 ± 0.08                           92.52 ± 0.08                            0.0345 ± 0.0130                                     0.0951 ± 0.0167
  G-∆UQ                              99.56 ± 0.04                           92.54 ± 0.04                            0.0361 ± 0.0020                                     0.0781 ± 0.0074
  Pretr. G-∆UQ                       99.60 ± 0.03                           93.63 ± 0.03                            0.0389 ± 0.0063                                    0.0686 ± 0.0109


                                           Table 8: GOODMotifLPE-basis, shifttype: covariate
  Method                             ID Acc                                         OOD Acc                                           ID Cal                                     OOD Cal
  Vanilla                            99.98 ± 0.04                              69.08 ± 0.04                            0.0161 ± 0.0044                                  0.3286 ± 0.2741
  Dens                               100.00 ± 0.00                             71.37 ± 0.00                           0.0106 ± 0.0001                                  0.2980 ± 0.3831
  Temp                               99.98 ± 0.04                              69.08 ± 0.04                            0.0161 ± 0.0044                                  0.3286 ± 0.2741
  MCD                                99.98 ± 0.09                              69.13 ± 0.09                            0.0154 ± 0.0075                                  0.3241 ± 0.2838
  G-∆UQ                              99.96 ± 0.05                              68.16 ± 0.05                            0.0185 ± 0.0037                                  0.3417 ± 0.2661
  Pretr. G-∆UQ                       99.92 ± 0.23                              66.95 ± 0.23                            0.0337 ± 0.0164                                  0.3806 ± 0.2653



                                                                                                     19
Preprint. Under Review.




                                       Table 9: GOODMotifLPE-size, shifttype: concept
 Method                           ID Acc                          OOD Acc                               ID Cal                             OOD Cal
 Vanilla                          98.43 ± 0.10                63.66 ± 0.10                     0.0446 ± 0.0031                      0.3401 ± 0.0622
 Dens                             98.48 ± 0.00                64.02 ± 0.00                     0.0514 ± 0.0000                      0.3384 ± 0.0814
 Temp                             98.43 ± 0.10                63.66 ± 0.10                     0.0467 ± 0.0017                      0.3335 ± 0.0623
 MCD                              98.61 ± 0.14                63.67 ± 0.14                    0.0429 ± 0.0055                       0.3394 ± 0.0656
 G-∆UQ                            98.45 ± 0.10                64.31 ± 0.10                     0.0518 ± 0.0020                      0.3097 ± 0.0592
 Pretr. G-∆UQ                     98.80 ± 0.10                63.86 ± 0.10                     0.0714 ± 0.0075                     0.2942 ± 0.0596

                                    Table 10: GOODMotifLPE-size, shifttype: covariate
 Method                           ID Acc                          OOD Acc                               ID Cal                             OOD Cal
 Vanilla                          99.22 ± 0.17                62.05 ± 0.17                     0.0496 ± 0.0021                      0.3527 ± 0.2483
 Dens                             99.43 ± 0.00                62.02 ± 0.00                     0.0479 ± 0.0000                      0.3671 ± 0.3557
 Temp                             99.22 ± 0.17                62.05 ± 0.17                     0.0525 ± 0.0029                      0.3504 ± 0.2489
 MCD                              99.22 ± 0.17                62.05 ± 0.17                    0.0470 ± 0.0075                       0.3507 ± 0.2564
 G-∆UQ                            99.31 ± 0.17                62.06 ± 0.17                     0.0504 ± 0.0041                      0.3002 ± 0.2569
 Pretr. G-∆UQ                     99.22 ± 0.14                65.00 ± 0.14                     0.0626 ± 0.0036                     0.2569 ± 0.2064

                                        Table 11: GOODSST2-length, shifttype: concept
 Method                           ID Acc                          OOD Acc                               ID Cal                             OOD Cal
 Vanilla                          93.88 ± 0.20                69.40 ± 0.20                     0.0976 ± 0.0034                      0.2882 ± 0.0175
 Dens                             94.37 ± 0.00                70.47 ± 0.00                      0.0871 ± 0.001                      0.2764 ± 0.0076
 Temp                             93.88 ± 0.20                69.40 ± 0.20                     0.0986 ± 0.0048                      0.2882 ± 0.0175
 MCD                              94.01 ± 0.42                68.69 ± 0.42                     0.0948 ± 0.0055                      0.2947 ± 0.0168
 G-∆UQ                            93.82 ± 0.13                69.34 ± 0.13                     0.0862 ± 0.0105                     0.2668 ± 0.0098
 Pretr. G-∆UQ                     93.97 ± 0.12                69.85 ± 0.12                    0.0834 ± 0.0064                       0.2676 ± 0.0111

                                      Table 12: GOODSST2-length, shifttype: covariate
 Method                       ID Acc                             OOD Acc                              ID Cal                              OOD Cal
 Vanilla                      89.67 ± 0.23                   82.60 ± 0.23                     0.1230 ± 0.0060                       0.1590 ± 0.0269
 Dens                         90.47 ± 0.00                   83.81 ± 0.00                     0.1142 ± 0.0003                       0.1540 ± 0.0386
 Temp                         89.67 ± 0.23                   82.60 ± 0.23                     0.1247 ± 0.0043                       0.1590 ± 0.0270
 MCD                          89.85 ± 0.29                   82.79 ± 0.29                     0.1237 ± 0.0073                       0.1517 ± 0.0262
 G-∆UQ                        89.69 ± 0.20                   82.82 ± 0.20                    0.1093 ± 0.0070                       90.1351 ± 0.0314
 Pretr. G-∆UQ                 89.63 ± 0.33                   82.04 ± 0.33                     0.1150 ± 0.0116                       0.1767 ± 0.0598

                                  Table 13: GOOD-Datasets, OOD Detection Performance
                        CMNIST (Color)                         MotifLPE (Basis)                       MotifLPE (Size)                             SST2
Method             Concept         Covariate              Concept          Covariate             Concept          Covariate            Concept           Covariate
Vanilla         0.7590 ± 0.0062     0.4682 ± 0.0920    0.7362 ± 0.0210     0.4662 ± 0.0015    0.6806 ± 0.0035    0.7552 ± 0.0743   0.3505 ± 0.0140     0.3459 ± 0.0661
Dens           0.7813 ± 0.0018      0.4652 ± 0.0193    0.7462 ± 0.0000    0.4711 ± 0.0000    0.6909 ± 0.0000     0.7151 ± 0.0000    0.3397 ± 0.0000    0.3304 ± 0.0000
Temp            0.7597 ± 0.0057     0.4443 ± 0.0883    0.7362 ± 0.0210     0.4662 ± 0.0015    0.6806 ± 0.0035    0.7552 ± 0.0743   0.3505 ± 0.0140     0.3459 ± 0.0661
MCD             0.7689 ± 0.0077     0.4536 ± 0.0900    0.7605 ± 0.0216     0.4662 ± 0.0108    0.6852 ± 0.0036    0.7552 ± 0.0743    0.3439 ± 0.0027    0.3080 ± 0.0056
G-∆UQ           0.7711 ± 0.0024     0.4700 ± 0.0439    0.7585 ± 0.0065     0.3281 ± 0.0228    0.6774 ± 0.0055    0.6916 ± 0.0675    0.3389 ± 0.0239    0.3513 ± 0.0423
Pretr. G-∆UQ    0.7741 ± 0.0167    0.5433 ± 0.1526    0.7694 ± 0.0290      0.2720 ± 0.0258    0.6864 ± 0.0047   0.8299 ± 0.1135     0.3247 ± 0.0559   0.4469 ± 0.0499



                Table 14: GOODCMNIST-color, shifttype: concept, GenGap Performance
                                     Method                              ID MAE(↓)                     OOD MAE(↓)
                                     Vanilla                     0.0047 ± 0.0013                     0.2008 ± 0.0098
                                     Dens                        0.0049 ± 0.0025                    0.1624 ± 0.0050
                                     Temp                       0.0045 ± 0.0011                      0.2026 ± 0.0101
                                     MCD                         0.8966 ± 0.0021                     0.3997 ± 0.0059
                                     G-∆UQ                       0.0049 ± 0.0025                     0.1901 ± 0.0102
                                     Pretr. G-∆UQ                0.0046 ± 0.0031                     0.1928 ± 0.0058



                                                                                  20
Preprint. Under Review.




         Table 15: GOODCMNIST-color, shifttype: covariate, GenGap Performance
                     Method            ID MAE(↓)         OOD MAE(↓)
                     Vanilla         0.0051 ± 0.0042     0.5104 ± 0.0893
                     Dens           0.0026 ± 0.0025      0.5076 ± 0.0167
                     Temp            0.0047 ± 0.0042     0.5189 ± 0.0918
                     MCD             0.7598 ± 0.0031    0.2401 ± 0.0223
                     G-∆UQ           0.0082 ± 0.0091     0.4933 ± 0.0721
                     Pretr. G-∆UQ    0.0027 ± 0.0002     0.3877 ± 0.0486

         Table 16: GOODMotifLPE-basis, shifttype: concept,GenGap Performance
                    Method             ID MAE(↓)          OOD MAE(↓)
                    Vanilla           0.0019 ± 0.0004     0.0458 ± 0.0037
                    Dens             0.0011 ± 0.0001      0.0282 ± 0.0000
                    Temp              0.0019 ± 0.0004     0.0458 ± 0.0037
                    MCD               0.9943 ± 0.0008     0.8951 ± 0.0109
                    G-∆UQ           0.0011 ± 0.0008**     0.0237 ± 0.0032
                    Pretr. G-∆UQ     0.0011 ± 0.0005     0.0188 ± 0.0129

        Table 17: GOODMotifLPE-basis, shifttype: covariate,GenGap Performance
                     Method            ID MAE(↓)         OOD MAE(↓)
                     Vanilla        0.0000 ± 0.0000      0.5709 ± 0.0128
                     Dens           0.0000 ± 0.0000      0.5703 ± 0.0000
                     Temp           0.0000 ± 0.0000      0.5709 ± 0.0128
                     MCD             0.9992 ± 0.0004    0.4148 ± 0.0057
                     G-∆UQ           0.0004 ± 0.0005     0.5729 ± 0.0194
                     Pretr. G-∆UQ    0.0004 ± 0.0002     0.5730 ± 0.0041

          Table 18: GOODMotifLPE-size, shifttype: concept,GenGap Performance
                     Method            ID MAE(↓)         OOD MAE(↓)
                     Vanilla         0.0042 ± 0.0019     0.3244 ± 0.0183
                     Dens           0.0011 ± 0.0000      0.3148 ± 0.0000
                     Temp            0.0042 ± 0.0019     0.3244 ± 0.0183
                     MCD             0.9842 ± 0.0010     0.5629 ± 0.0023
                     G-∆UQ           0.0026 ± 0.0013     0.3179 ± 0.0079
                     Pretr. G-∆UQ    0.0047 ± 0.0009    0.3076 ± 0.0162

         Table 19: GOODMotifLPE-size, shifttype: covariate,GenGap Performance
                     Method            ID MAE(↓)         OOD MAE(↓)
                     Vanilla         0.0012 ± 0.0005     0.5376 ± 0.1460
                     Dens           0.0010 ± 0.0002     0.6273 ± 0.0000
                     Temp            0.0012 ± 0.0005     0.5376 ± 0.1460
                     MCD             0.9910 ± 0.0012     0.3586 ± 0.0250
                     G-∆UQ          0.0010 ± 0.0012      0.5280 ± 0.1899
                     Pretr. G-∆UQ   0.0010 ± 0.0012      0.3564 ± 0.1435

           Table 20: GOODSST2-length, shifttype: concept,GenGap Performance
                     Method            ID MAE(↓)         OOD MAE(↓)
                     Vanilla         0.0015 ± 0.0004     0.1170 ± 0.0067
                     Dens           0.0007 ± 0.0001     0.1055 ± 0.0000
                     Temp            0.0015 ± 0.0004     0.1170 ± 0.0067
                     MCD             0.9385 ± 0.0028     0.6624 ± 0.0222
                     G-∆UQ           0.0021 ± 0.0026     0.1244 ± 0.0168
                     Pretr. G-∆UQ    0.0031 ± 0.0017     0.1140 ± 0.0047



                                             21
Preprint. Under Review.




           Table 21: GOODSST2-length, shifttype: concept,GenGap Performance
                     Method           ID MAE(↓)         OOD MAE(↓)
                     Vanilla         0.0045 ± 0.0023    0.0566 ± 0.0445
                     Dens           0.0004 ± 0.0000     0.0479 ± 0.0000
                     Temp            0.0045 ± 0.0023    0.0566 ± 0.0445
                     MCD             0.8961 ± 0.0028    0.7954 ± 0.0016
                     G-∆UQ           0.0043 ± 0.0024   0.0540 ± 0.0435
                     Pretr. G-∆UQ    0.0029 ± 0.0023   0.0302 ± 0.0267




                                            22
