                                             DARTF ORMER : F INDING T HE B EST T YPE O F ATTENTION


                                                      Jason Ross Brown                                           Yiren Zhao
                                                    University of Cambridge                  Imperial College London and University of Cambridge
                                                     jrb239@cam.ac.uk                                     a.zhao@imperial.ac.uk

                                                               Ilia Shumailov                                        Robert D Mullins
arXiv:2210.00641v1 [cs.LG] 2 Oct 2022




                                                             University of Oxford                                  University of Cambridge
                                                       ilia.shumailov@chch.ox.ac.uk                            robert.mullins@cl.cam.ac.uk




                                                                                              A BSTRACT
                                                 Given the wide and ever growing range of different efficient Transformer attention mechanisms, it
                                                 is important to identify which attention is most effective when given a task. In this work, we are
                                                 also interested in combining different attention types to build heterogeneous Transformers. We first
                                                 propose a DARTS-like Neural Architecture Search (NAS) method to find the best attention for a
                                                 given task, in this setup, all heads use the same attention (homogeneous models). Our results suggest
                                                 that NAS is highly effective on this task, and it identifies the best attention mechanisms for IMDb
                                                 byte level text classification and Listops. We then extend our framework to search for and build
                                                 Transformers with multiple different attention types, and call them heterogeneous Transformers. We
                                                 show that whilst these heterogeneous Transformers are better than the average homogeneous models,
                                                 they cannot outperform the best. We explore the reasons why heterogeneous attention makes sense,
                                                 and why it ultimately fails.

                                        1   Introduction

                                        Since the first proposal of the Transformer architecture by Vaswani et al. [2017], many alternatives have been proposed
                                        for the attention mechanism [Beltagy et al., 2020, Child et al., 2019, Choromanski et al., 2020, Katharopoulos et al.,
                                        2020, Kitaev et al., 2020, Liu et al., 2018b, Tay et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2020, Zaheer et al., 2020] due to the original
                                        dot-product attention mechanism having quadratic complexities in time and space with respect to the length of the input
                                        sequence. Recent work [Tay et al., 2020b] showed that these alternative architectures often perform well at different
                                        tasks when there is no pretraining, thus there is no clear attention that is best at every type of task. Therefore we ask:
                                        Can we efficiently learn the best attention for a given long range task?
                                        It is thought that each attention head in the Transformer can learn a different relationship, much like how in Convolutional
                                        Neural Networks (CNNs) each kernel learns a different feature. Tay et al. [2020b] hypothesizes that each attention
                                        mechanism represents a different functional bias for which attention relationships should be learned, and that the utility
                                        of this bias is dependent on the task and its processing requirements. Thus if we had many different attention types in a
                                        Transformer, they could each more easily learn different types of relationship, and thus make the Transformer more
                                        effective overall. So is the optimal attention for a task a mixture of different attentions?
                                        In this paper we apply Neural Architecture Search (NAS) techniques to the Transformer attention search space and
                                        propose DARTFormer, a DARTS-like method [Liu et al., 2018a] for finding the best attention, a high level illustration
                                        of the method is presented in Figure 1. To do this we use multiple candidate attention types in parallel and sum their
                                        outputs in the attention mechanism of the Transformer. Following Wang et al. [2021] we use masked validation accuracy
                                        drop as our metric for determining the performance of each attention type.
                                        For clarity we refer to computation of the QKV linear projections, multi-head attention, and then concatenation and
                                        linear projection back down to the sequence features as the attention block. In a standard Transformer there is only a
                                        single attention block that has multiple heads. When training mixed attention models (either supernetworks or a final
                                        heterogeneous model) we use multiple attention blocks, each containing only a single attention type.
                              Inputs                                                                  Inputs


                           Initial layers                                                         Initial layers




           Bigbird            Linear             Synthesizer                         Performer                       Reformer




                         Post-attn. layers                                                       Post-attn. layers


                                                                                                                        x Num layers
                            Final layers                                                           Final layers


                        Output Probabilities                                                Output Probabilities

Figure 1: Our supernetwork architecture (left) that we search over, and an example final derived architecture (right) that
is heterogeneous across heads and homogeneous across layers. The supernetwork is a single layer Transformer with
several different multi-head attention blocks whose outputs are averaged.


Following Tay et al. [2020b], we use a representative mixture of different attention mechanisms as part of our search
space in order to cover the main methods of achieving efficient attention. The specific attentions we use are: Bigbird
[Zaheer et al., 2020], Linear Transformer [Katharopoulos et al., 2020], Linformer [Wang et al., 2020], Local attention
[Liu et al., 2018b], Longformer [Beltagy et al., 2020], Performer [Choromanski et al., 2020], Reformer [Kitaev et al.,
2020], Sparse Transformer [Child et al., 2019], and Synthesizer [Tay et al., 2021].
We use our setup to investigate two key paradigms. The first is learning the best attention for a new task with a single
layer Transformer, this means only one full-scale Transformer needs to be trained after a good attention mechanism
is found. The second paradigm, illustrated in Figure 1, is using a single layer Transformer to find the best head-wise
heterogeneous attention mixture for that task, and then using that mixture in each layer of a full Transformer model,
making it layer-wise homogeneous. We test these paradigms on three different tasks. They are taken from Tay et al.
[2020b] and were specifically designed to test the capabilities of efficient long range Transformers.
In this paper we make the following contributions:

       • We propose a DARTS-like framework to efficiently find the best attention for a task.
       • We extend this framework to building and searching for optimal heterogeneous attention Transformer models.
       • We empirically show that heterogeneous Transformers cannot outperform the best homogeneous Transformer
         for our selected long range NLP tasks.


2     Related Work

2.1   Transformer Attention

Since Vaswani et al. [2017], a large variety of replacement attention mechanisms were proposed. These use different
approaches, such as, low rank approximations and kernel based methods [Choromanski et al., 2020, Katharopoulos
et al., 2020, Tay et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2020], fixed/factorised/random patterns [Beltagy et al., 2020, Child et al., 2019,
Tay et al., 2020a, 2021, Zaheer et al., 2020], learnable patterns [Kitaev et al., 2020, Tay et al., 2020a], recurrence [Dai
et al., 2019] and more [Lee et al., 2019]. Tay et al. [2020c] gives a detailed survey of different attention mechanisms.
Tay et al. [2020b] compares the performance, speed and memory usage of many of these different attention mechanisms
on a variety of tasks, including NLP and image processing. Their main finding is that the performance of each attention
mechanism is highly dependent on the nature of the task being learned when pretrained embeddings or weights aren’t
used. This motivates the initial part of our research.


                                                               2
2.2     NAS on Transformers

Recent work of Liu et al. [2022] applies RankNAS [Hu et al., 2021] to cosFormer [Qin et al., 2022] and standard
Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017]. They perform a search of the hyperparameters on a cosFormer network and
compare these to the same method applied to the standard Transformer. Tsai et al. [2020] searches the hyperparameter
space of a BERT [Devlin et al., 2018] model architecture heterogeneously to find an optimal efficient network. These
methods search hyperparameters, whereas we fix hyperparameters and search over the space of attention mechanisms.


3     Method

3.1     DARTS Style NAS

We train a supernetwork that contains attention heads of each attention type. This is analogous to the edges in a DARTS
cell containing all possible operations for that edge. We also use ‘fixed α’ with masked validation accuracy as our
metric for the strength of each edge as detailed in Wang et al. [2021]. Standard DARTS assigns a weight for each
edge in the computation graph and softmaxes this on the output of each cell (see Figure 2, left, in Appendix C), since
we are using a ’fixed α’ approach we do not need to do this and simply average our edges without using learnable
weights. This allows us to train the supernetwork until convergence and then select the best attention (or prune out the
worst). Note that this removes the need to carry out the bi-level optimisation that is required in the original DARTS
paradigm that uses validation performance to train the edge weights. Our approach is illustrated in Figure 1. The
DARTS supernetwork cell and the standard Transformer architecture are given in Appendix C in Figure 2, to show how
our architecture relates to them.

3.2     Architecture and Search Space

Our Transformer encoder supernetwork consists of an embedding layer, an attention block supernetwork, a feed-forward
network (FFN), and a linear classifier layer. In normal Transformer attention, each attention block consists of: QKV
linear projections from features to number of heads × head dimension, scaled dot product attention on each head,
concatenation of heads, and a final dense projection back to the feature dimension [Vaswani et al., 2017]. In theory,
we want to search over the space of alternatives for the scaled dot product attention operation independently for each
head. This would replace scaled dot product attention in a normal Transformer with an average of candidate attention
mechanisms in a DARTS-like paradigm. The averages from each head would then be concatenated and linearly
projected back to the feature dimension as normal.
However, some attention mechanisms, such as Reformer [Kitaev et al., 2020], modify the linear projections or
concatenation operations. Because of this we instead search over candidate multi-head attention blocks where each
one implements the projections, attention, and concatenation operations. This is illustrated in Figure 4 in Appendix C
. When the candidate blocks are single head and we have H blocks per candidate attention mechanism, after the
architecture search is complete, the computation graph is equivalent to if we searched over the attention mechanisms
themselves with H heads. With the search at the block level with single heads, each attention mechanism can learn its
own linear projections, whereas in a search over just the attention mechanisms these would be shared within each head.
The disadvantage of this is increased memory and computation during the search, since now heads do not share the
linear projection.

3.3     Experiments

3.3.1    Finding Optimal Homogeneous Attention
For the first experiment we train a single layer network with a block for each attention mechanism. These blocks
are each initialized with the desired number of final heads for that task. After training we perform a single masked
validation accuracy trial and pick the highest scoring mechanism as a good candidate mechanism for that task when
used in a full Transformer model homogeneously. This paradigm is summarized in an algorithmic form in Algorithm 1
in Appendix D.

3.3.2    Finding Optimal Heterogeneous Attention
In this paradigm we try to learn an optimal single layer with a fixed number of heads and stack it, analogous to searching
for an optimal cell in DARTS.


                                                            3
We begin with H attention blocks of each attention type, each one a single head, where H is the desired number of final
attention heads in our heterogeneous Transformer. We train the supernetwork to rough convergence and then alternate
between removing the worst attention block and fine-tune training the remaining model. We do this until we have only
H single-head attention blocks left, each potentially a different attention mechanism.
Once we have the optimal layer architecture for the task, we reinitialize the Transformer network with multiple layers
where each one contains the mix of attentions found to be optimal. Where possible we group attentions of the same
type into the same attention block with multiple heads. We then train this full Transformer model on the task until
convergence. This paradigm is summarized in Algorithm 2 in Appendix D. We will refer to this method as ‘NAS Prune’.
We also test a simpler method where we take the top 4 scoring attentions from the single layer to find the best
homogeneous attention, and then train a full Transformer network with an even mix of these attentions at each layer.
This allows us to evaluate the general capabilities of heterogeneous attention. We will refer to this method as ‘NAS
One-shot’.
We also experiment with a head-wise homogeneous, layer-wise heterogeneous attention Transformer. This is detailed in
Appendix B.

3.4   Attention Evaluation

In order to evaluate the strength of each block we used a masked validation accuracy drop metric [Wang et al., 2021].
First we get a baseline accuracy by running our model on the validation set. Then, for each block, we mask it out and
record the new validation accuracy. This is illustrated in Figure 3 in Appendix C. The best block is the one which drops
the accuracy the most, and the worst either drops it the least or increases it the most.


4     Evaluation

For each experiment we run the search on 3 different tasks taken from Long Range Arena (LRA) [Tay et al., 2020b].
These are: byte level binary text classification on IMDb dataset with 1k sequence length, Listops - 10-way classification
with 2k sequence length, and byte level document matching which uses 4k sequence length. Hyperparameters typically
match those used in LRA, details are given in the Appendix A. One notable difference is that we train each homogeneous
model 3 times and take an average. The Listops and document matching tasks are also trained for longer to allow the
models to better converge.

4.1   Finding Optimal Homogeneous Attention

Table 1 shows us that our selection process is effective at identifying the best attention mechanism for the text
classification and Listops tasks. For both it also picks out the third best performing model with either its own second or
third best. For the document matching task, however, the single layer fails to find one of the top 3 attention mechanisms
within top 3 picks. One notable difference between its’ document matching scores and the scores for the other two are
that they are much smaller. This could indicate that when the score is low magnitude, the model is not confident in its
selection. This can then be used to identify if it made a poor choice in advance of training the full homogeneous model.


Table 1: Test accuracy for the full model based on results of Tay et al. [2020b], and masked validation accuracy impact
(more positive is better) for our trained single layer multiple attention block network (first, second, third).
                                         Text classification      Listops       Document Matching
                    Attention type
                                         Acc       Score        Acc Score       Acc      Score
                       Bigbird           62.7       0.30        36.7 0.25       63.9      0.011
                  Linear Transformer     64.4       0.17        37.1 -0.40      64.2     -0.006
                      Linformer          58.6      -0.28        29.9 0.00       64.5      0.006
                         Local           56.3       0.14        36.8 0.30       58.0     0.000
                     Longformer          61.8      -0.20        36.8 0.40       61.2      0.039
                      Performer          64.5       0.51        36.2 0.30       65.0      0.000
                      Reformer           55.7       0.44        37.8 11.85      58.3     0.028
                  Sparse Transformer     61.3       0.02        37.0 0.50       63.2     0.000
                     Synthesizer         61.4      -0.03        36.5 0.30       71.1     -0.006



                                                            4
4.2   Finding Optimal Heterogeneous Attention

Table 2 shows the performance for the best homogeneous model, the fully trained model with an architecture chosen by
the pruning NAS method (NAS Prune), and the fully trained model with an architecture chosen by taking the best four
attentions from the single layer selection to find the best attention (NAS One-shot).

Table 2: The selected attention mixes with accuracy of full model vs the accuracy of the best homogeneous models for
each task
                                   Best Homogeneous            NAS Prune               NAS One-shot
                 Task        H
                                   Attention  Acc          Attentions   Acc        Attentions     Acc
                                                           Linear
                                                                                   Bigbird x2
                                                           Performer x2
                 Text                                                              Linear x2
                            8      Performer      64.5     Reformer x2 63.9                           64.4
             Classification                                                        Performer x2
                                                           Sparse x2
                                                                                   Reformer x2
                                                           Synthesizer
                                                           Linear
                                                                                   Local x2
                                                           Longformer
                                                                                   Longformer x2
                Listops      8     Reformer       37.8     Performer    36.3                          37.1
                                                                                   Reformer x2
                                                           Reformer x3
                                                                                   Sparse x2
                                                           Sparse x2
                                                           BigBird                 Bigbird
              Document                                     Linear                  Linformer
                             4     Synthesizer    71.1                  67.0                          64.7
              Matching                                     Sparse                  Longformer
                                                           Synthesizer             Reformer

This shows us that heterogeneous Transformer networks fail to beat the best homogeneous model for any task. We also
experimented with choosing a mixture of the best performing homogeneous attentions, and having more attention heads
of the better attention mechanisms for that task, but neither of these two variations gave consistent improvement on the
NAS One-shot method. This also shows us that the expensive pruning method poses no consistent advantages over the
far cheaper NAS One-shot when it correctly identifies good attentions.

5     Theories For Heterogeneous Attention Sub-optimality
Whilst searching for the optimal homogeneous attention works well and validates our NAS method, our found
heterogeneous attention Transformer models cannot beat the best homogeneous models. This conflicts with the idea
that the different mechanisms provide different biases which help the Transformer learn many different and useful
relationships. Here we provide some theories to explain what we have observed.
Different attention mechanisms do not bias the relationships learned. It might be that the relationships learned are not
affected by the attention type, and the performance differences noted in Tay et al. [2020b] are due to some other effect.
Thus the amount of functional bias by attention mechanisms is small.
Each tasks is best solved with attention that has learned specific types of relationships. Whilst learning lots of
relationships might be useful, perhaps each tasks requires a narrow subset of relationships to be learned, and thus a
homogeneous attention well suited to this narrow subset is optimal.
Bad attention degrades performance. It might be that the different attention mechanisms do learn different relationships,
and this generally helps, but a small number of poorly suited attention types degrade model performance. This could be
tested by more comprehensive studies on the effects of combining different attention types.
The training of other aspects of the Transformer is dependent on the attention mechanism. It might be that when
trained in homogeneous models, the attention mechanism influences how other parts of the model learn, such as the
feed-forward network. Thus if there were multiple attention mechanisms, these parts might have conflicting pressures
on their learning which cause them to not be well suited to any of the attention mechanisms.

6     Conclusion
For a given task it is often not clear which attention mechanism will perform best. Using a DARTS-like method you
can train a single layer mixed attention Transformer and use masked validation accuracy drop to determine the best


                                                           5
attention to use in a full Transformer model. If the masked validation drop scores are very low, the best attention may
not have been correctly identified.
Heterogeneous attention Transformer networks typically perform better than the average homogeneous one. Reasonable
combinations of attention can be found via a DARTS-like method. However, heterogeneous Transformers cannot beat a
homogeneous model that is using the best attention mechanism for that given task.

References
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sparse transformers. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas Sarlos, Peter
   Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, et al. Rethinking attention with performers. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2009.14794, 2020.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl:
   Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
   transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Chi Hu, Chenglong Wang, Xiangnan Ma, Xia Meng, Yinqiao Li, Tong Xiao, Jingbo Zhu, and Changliang Li. Ranknas:
   Efficient neural architecture search by pairwise ranking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07383, 2021.
Angelos Katharopoulos, Apoorv Vyas, Nikolaos Pappas, and François Fleuret. Transformers are rnns: Fast autoregres-
   sive transformers with linear attention. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5156–5165. PMLR,
   2020.
Nikita Kitaev, Łukasz Kaiser, and Anselm Levskaya. Reformer: The efficient transformer. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2001.04451, 2020.
Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set transformer: A
   framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In International conference on machine
   learning, pp. 3744–3753. PMLR, 2019.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1806.09055, 2018a.
Peter J Liu, Mohammad Saleh, Etienne Pot, Ben Goodrich, Ryan Sepassi, Lukasz Kaiser, and Noam Shazeer. Generating
   wikipedia by summarizing long sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.10198, 2018b.
Zexiang Liu, Dong Li, Kaiyue Lu, Zhen Qin, Weixuan Sun, Jiacheng Xu, and Yiran Zhong. Neural architecture search
   on efficient transformers and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.13955, 2022.
Zhen Qin, Weixuan Sun, Hui Deng, Dongxu Li, Yunshen Wei, Baohong Lv, Junjie Yan, Lingpeng Kong, and Yiran
   Zhong. cosformer: Rethinking softmax in attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08791, 2022.
Yi Tay, Dara Bahri, Liu Yang, Donald Metzler, and Da-Cheng Juan. Sparse sinkhorn attention. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9438–9447. PMLR, 2020a.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Samira Abnar, Yikang Shen, Dara Bahri, Philip Pham, Jinfeng Rao, Liu Yang, Sebas-
   tian Ruder, and Donald Metzler. Long range arena: A benchmark for efficient transformers. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2011.04006, 2020b.
Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, and Donald Metzler. Efficient transformers: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys
  (CSUR), 2020c.
Yi Tay, Dara Bahri, Donald Metzler, Da-Cheng Juan, Zhe Zhao, and Che Zheng. Synthesizer: Rethinking self-attention
   for transformer models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 10183–10192. PMLR, 2021.
Henry Tsai, Jayden Ooi, Chun-Sung Ferng, Hyung Won Chung, and Jason Riesa. Finding fast transformers: One-shot
   neural architecture search by component composition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06808, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
   Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ruochen Wang, Minhao Cheng, Xiangning Chen, Xiaocheng Tang, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Rethinking architecture
   selection in differentiable nas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.04392, 2021.


                                                          6
Sinong Wang, Belinda Z Li, Madian Khabsa, Han Fang, and Hao Ma. Linformer: Self-attention with linear complexity.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.

Yuhui Xu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Xin Chen, Guo-Jun Qi, Qi Tian, and Hongkai Xiong. Pc-darts: Partial channel
  connections for memory-efficient architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05737, 2019.

Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontanon, Philip
 Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, et al. Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17283–17297, 2020.



A    Experimental Details

In all tasks we tested on, we used an Adam optimizer with linear warm-up and square root decay. We used a base
learning rate of 0.05, β1 = 0.9, and β2 = 0.98. We used a batch size of 32 for every task. All attention mechanisms
used the [CLS] token for classification. Task specific hyperparameters are given in table 3. In all Transformer models
the feed-forward network (FFN) has a single hidden dimension. Before testing we take the model which had the best
validation accuracy during training, the long train times are to ensure convergence.


                       Table 3: Task specific hyperparameters, see introduction for definitions.
               Task                   Training Steps     Warmup       Seq. Length     E      A     M
               IMDb Token Level       30k                8k           1k              512    64    2048
               IMDb Byte Level        30k                8k           1k              512    64    2048
               Listops                10k                1k           2k              512    64    2048
               Document Matching      10k                8k           4k              128    32    512




B    Layer-wise Heterogeneous Attention

Here we try another method of heterogeneous attention. Instead of using layers with an identical mixture of attentions
at each layer, we make each layer homogeneous in its attention but use different attentions for different layers.
Given we want each layer to have H attention heads of a single type, we initialize an attention block with H heads for
each candidate attention mechanism in each layer. We train the supernetwork to rough convergence and then alternate
between removing an attention block in a layer and fine-tune training the remaining model. We go through each layer
starting with the first, removing the worst attention block before moving on to the next layer. Once we remove a block
from the final layer we begin again at the first layer. We keep passing through the network, removing and fine-tuning,
until only one attention block remains in each layer.
We then take the attention blocks learned for each layer and train a new Transformer from scratch with those attentions
at each layer. This paradigm is summarized in algorithm form in the appendix as Algorithm 3.
Due to the high memory requirements of this task, we use block sampling when training. This means that for each
training batch we only use a randomly selected subset of the candidate blocks in each layer. This reduces memory
requirements as there are less intermediate values and computations, but can affect the training dynamics. Using this
method within a DARTS like paradigm is shown to work well by Xu et al. [2019].
We test this method on the text classification task which has 1k input sequence length to further limit computation
requirements. As the Transformers used in LRA for this task had 6 layers, we searched for a 6 layer model with
layer-wise attention heterogeneity. The resulting architecture was:
Performer → Bigbird → Performer → Sparse → Performer → Sparse
When trained with the same hyperparameters as the LRA models, it achieved a test accuracy of 64.6%. This puts this
model around average for this task, unable to beat several attentions such as the Linear Transformer which had a test
accuracy of 65.9%, or the Performer which achieved 65.4%.


                                                          7
C    Supplementary Diagrams
Figures 2 to 4 help illustrate how our approach relates to DARTS and the original Transformer, attention heads being
pruned during the search process in finding optimal heterogeneous attention, and an overview of the differences between
the theoretical and actual supernetwork.

                                                                       Inputs



                                                                    Input Embed

                                                                                           Initial Layers

                                                                   Position Embed

                                 0
                        S




                                          S
                                                                                        x Num layers


                                     S                            Multi-Head Attn.




                 1
                            S




                                                                    Layer Norm


                 S
                                                                                                       Post-attention layers
                                 2                                      FFN



                                 S


                                                                    Layer Norm

                                 3

                                                                    Linear Layer

                                                                                           Final layers

                                                                      Softmax



                                                                 Output Probabilities


Figure 2: DARTS Cell (left) and typical Transformer architecture (right). In DARTS inputs to all blocks are summed
and ’S’ denotes a softmax layer. Also shown is how the layers in the Transformer relate to the diagram in figure 1.




                                                          8
         Head 1                                                                        Head 1
            QKV Linear    Attn. type 1           Linear                                   QKV Linear    Attn. type 1   Linear



         Head 2                                                                        Head 2
            QKV Linear    Attn. type 2           Linear                                   QKV Linear    Attn. type 2   Linear

 Input                                                            Output       Input                                            Output

         Head 3                                                                        Head 3
             QKV Linear   Attn. type 1           Linear                                    QKV Linear   Attn. type 1   Linear



         Head 4                                                                        Head 4
             QKV Linear   Attn. type 2           Linear                                    QKV Linear   Attn. type 2   Linear




                                                 Head 1
                                                     QKV Linear   Attn. type 1          Linear



                                                 Head 2
                                                     QKV Linear   Attn. type 2          Linear

                                         Input                                                          Output

                                                 Head 3
                                                     QKV Linear   Attn. type 1          Linear



                                                 Head 4
                                                     QKV Linear   Attn. type 2          Linear



Figure 3: From left to right and top to bottom this figure shows how we remove from the model the worst attention
block until we are left with just the best ones.




                                                                           9
                                  Head 1
                                                        Attn. type 1

                                     QKV Linear

                                                        Attn. type 2


                        Inputs                                                 Concatenation   Linear   Output
                                  Head 2
                                                        Attn. type 1

                                     QKV Linear

                                                        Attn. type 2



                                      (a) Theoretical multi head attention supernetwork


                                   Head 1

                                       QKV Linear           Attn. type 1          Linear



                                   Head 2

                                       QKV Linear           Attn. type 2          Linear

                        Input
                                                                                                        Output
                                   Head 3

                                       QKV Linear            Attn. type 1          Linear



                                   Head 4

                                       QKV Linear            Attn. type 2          Linear


                                            (b) Actual multi head attention supernetwork


                                    Head 1

                                           QKV Linear         Optimal attn.           Linear


                         Input                                                                          Output
                                    Head 2

                                           QKV Linear          Optimal attn.          Linear


                                   (c) Final multi attention layer after architecture search
Figure 4: Diagrams of the multi head attention layer with the theoretical attention search space and the actual one used.
Also shown is the resulting multi head attention architecture which would be equivalent in both cases.




                                                                       10
D    Algorithms
Algorithms 1 and 2 correspond to the paradigms outlined in section 3.3.
Let Bi denote the set of attention blocks in layer i, with L denoting the set of layers. We also use a to represent accuracy
and s to represent a score with Si representing the set of scores for the attention blocks in layer i. For single layer
networks, the layer subscript is omitted.

Algorithm 1 Finding optimal homogeneous attention
 1: Initialise a single layer supernetwork with a multi-head attention block for each attention type
 2: Train supernetwork until convergence
 3: abase ← Validation accuracy of supernetwork
 4: for bi ∈ B do
 5:     Mask out bi
 6:     ai ← Validation accuracy
 7:     si ← abase − ai
 8: end for
 9: Selected attention mechanism ← max(S)
10: Initialise full Transformer using the selected attention mechanism
11: Train until convergence


Algorithm 2 Finding optimal heterogeneous attention
 1: Initialise a single layer super network with H single-head attention blocks for each attention type, where H is the
    desired number of heads per layer in the final network.
 2: Train supernetwork until rough convergence
 3: repeat
 4:     abase ← Validation accuracy of supernetwork
 5:     for bi ∈ B do
 6:          Mask out bi
 7:          ai ← Validation accuracy
 8:          si ← abase − ai
 9:     end for
10:     if |B| > H then
11:          From B remove block corresponding to min(S)
12:          Train remaining supernetwork a small amount
13:     end if
14: until |B| = H
15: Boptimal ← B
16: Initialise a new network with multiple layers, where each layer has blocks Boptimal
17: Train until convergence




                                                            11
Algorithm 3 Head-wise homogeneous, layer-wise heterogeneous mixed attention search
 1: Initialise a multi layer supernetwork with multi-head attention block for each attention type in each layer
 2: Train supernetwork until rough convergence
 3: repeat
 4:      for i ∈ L do
 5:          abase ← Validation accuracy of supernetwork
 6:          for bij ∈ Bi do
 7:               Mask out bij
 8:               aij ← Validation accuracy
 9:               sij ← abase − aij
10:          end for
11:          if |Bi | > 1 then
12:               From Bi remove block corresponding to min(Si )
13:               Train remaining supernetwork a small amount
14:          end if
15:      end for
16: until |Bi | = 1, ∀i ∈ L
17: Initialise a full Transformer model where the attention mechanism used in layer i corresponds to the type of the last
    block left in Bi
18: Train until convergence




                                                           12
