                                                Flexible Attention-Based Multi-Policy Fusion for
                                                     Efficient Deep Reinforcement Learning


                                                     Zih-Yun Chiu1∗ Yi-Lin Tuan2∗ William Yang Wang2 Michael C. Yip1
                                                     1
                                                       University of California, San Diego 2 University of California, Santa Barbara
arXiv:2210.03729v2 [cs.LG] 9 Oct 2023




                                                                                        Abstract

                                                    Reinforcement learning (RL) agents have long sought to approach the efficiency
                                                    of human learning. Humans are great observers who can learn by aggregating
                                                    external knowledge from various sources, including observations from others’
                                                    policies of attempting a task. Prior studies in RL have incorporated external
                                                    knowledge policies to help agents improve sample efficiency. However, it remains
                                                    non-trivial to perform arbitrary combinations and replacements of those policies,
                                                    an essential feature for generalization and transferability. In this work, we present
                                                    Knowledge-Grounded RL (KGRL), an RL paradigm fusing multiple knowledge
                                                    policies and aiming for human-like efficiency and flexibility. We propose a new
                                                    actor architecture for KGRL, Knowledge-Inclusive Attention Network (KIAN),
                                                    which allows free knowledge rearrangement due to embedding-based attentive
                                                    action prediction. KIAN also addresses entropy imbalance, a problem arising
                                                    in maximum entropy KGRL that hinders an agent from efficiently exploring the
                                                    environment, through a new design of policy distributions. The experimental
                                                    results demonstrate that KIAN outperforms alternative methods incorporating
                                                    external knowledge policies and achieves efficient and flexible learning. Our
                                                    implementation is available at https://github.com/Pascalson/KGRL.git.


                                        1       Introduction

                                        Reinforcement learning (RL) has been effectively used in a variety of fields, including physics [7, 35]
                                        and robotics [15, 30]. This success can be attributed to RL’s iterative process of interacting with the
                                        environment and learning a policy to get positive feedback. Despite being influenced by the learning
                                        process of infants [32], the RL process can require a large number of samples to solve a task [1],
                                        indicating that the learning efficiency of RL agents is still far behind that of humans.
                                        What learning capabilities do humans possess, yet RL agents still missing? Studies in social
                                        learning [4] have demonstrated that humans often observe the behavior of others in diverse situations
                                        and utilize those strategies as external knowledge to accelerate their own exploration of solution-
                                        space. This type of learning is very flexible for humans since they can freely reuse and update the
                                        knowledge they already possess. The followings are the five properties (the last four have been
                                        mentioned in [14]) that summarize the efficiency and flexibility of human learning. [Knowledge-
                                        Acquirable]: Humans can develop their strategies by observing others. [Sample-Efficient]: Humans
                                        require fewer interactions with the environment to solve a task by learning from external knowledge.
                                        [Generalizable]: Humans can apply previously observed strategies, whether developed internally or
                                        provided externally, to unseen tasks. [Compositional]: Humans can combine strategies from multiple
                                        sources to form their knowledge set. [Incremental]: Humans do not need to relearn how to navigate
                                        the entire knowledge set from scratch when they remove outdated strategies or add new ones.
                                            ∗
                                                indicates equal contribution. The corresponding emails are zchiu@ucsd.edu and ytuan@cs.ucsb.edu


                                        37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
   Policy                                               Policy                       if ...
                                                                                     else ...
                                       Joy                                                          Joy
 Observed                                            Observed
              Amy        Jack                                    Amy       Jack     Myself
   from                                                from

  Solved                                                Solved
    for                                                   for



Figure 1: An illustration of knowledge-acquirable, compositional, and incremental properties in
KGRL. Joy first learns to ride a motorcycle by observing Amy skateboarding and Jack biking. Then
Joy learns to drive a car with the knowledge set expanded by Joy’s developed strategy of motorcycling.



Possessing all five learning properties remains challenging for RL agents. Previous work has endowed
an RL agent with the ability to learn from external knowledge (knowledge-acquirable) and mitigate
sample inefficiency [21, 25, 27, 36], where the knowledge focused in this paper is state-action
mappings (full definition in Section 3), including pre-collected demonstrations or policies. Among
those methods, some have also allowed agents to combine policies in different forms to predict optimal
actions (compositional) [25, 27]. However, these approaches may not be suitable for incremental
learning, in which an agent learns a sequence of tasks using one expandable knowledge set. In such
a case, whenever the knowledge set is updated by adding or replacing policies, prior methods, e.g.,
[27, 36], require relearning the entire multi-policy fusion process, even if the current task is similar to
the previous one. This is because their designs of knowledge representations are intertwined with the
knowledge-fusing mechanism, which restricts changing the number of policies in the knowledge set.
To this end, our goal is to enhance RL grounded on external knowledge policies with more flexibility.
We first introduce Knowledge-Grounded Reinforcement Learning (KGRL), an RL paradigm that
seeks to find an optimal policy of a Markov Decision Process (MDP) given a set of external policies
as illustrated in Figure 1. We then formally define the knowledge-acquirable, sample-efficient,
generalizable, compositional, and incremental properties that a well-trained KGRL agent can possess.
We propose a simple yet effective actor model, Knowledge-Inclusive Attention Network (KIAN),
for KGRL. KIAN consists of three components: (1) an internal policy that learns a self-developed
strategy, (2) embeddings that represent each policy, and (3) a query that performs embedding-based
attentive action prediction to fuse the internal and external policies. The policy-embedding and query
design in KIAN is crucial, as it enables the model to be incremental by unifying policy representations
and separating them from the policy-fusing process. Consequently, updating or adding policies to
KIAN has minimal effect on its architecture and does not require retraining the entire network.
Additionally, KIAN addresses the problem of entropy imbalance in KGRL, where agents tend to
choose only a few sub-optimal policies from the knowledge set. We provide mathematical evidence
that entropy imbalance can prevent agents from exploring the environment with multiple policies.
Then we introduce a new approach for modeling external-policy distributions to mitigate this issue.
Through experiments on grid navigation [5] and robotic manipulation [24] tasks, KIAN outperforms
alternative methods incorporating external policies in terms of sample efficiency as well as the ability
to do compositional and incremental learning. Furthermore, our analyses suggest that KIAN has
better generalizability when applied to environments that are either simpler or more complex.
Our contributions are:

• We introduce KGRL, an RL paradigm studying how agents learn with external policies while being
  knowledge-acquirable, sample-efficient, generalizable, compositional, and incremental.

• We propose KIAN, an actor model for KGRL that fuses multiple knowledge policies with better
  flexibility and addresses entropy imbalance for more efficient exploration.

• We demonstrate in experiments that KIAN outperforms other methods incorporating external
  knowledge policies under different environmental setups.


                                                    2
2   Related Work

A popular line of research in RL is to improve sample efficiency with demonstrations (RL from
demonstrations; RLfD). Demonstrations are examples of completing a task and are represented
as state-action pairs. Previous work has leveraged demonstrations by introducing them into the
policy-update steps of RL [8, 11, 21, 23, 28, 34]. For example, Nair et al. [21] adds a buffer of
demonstrations to the RL framework and uses the data sampled from it to calculate a behavior-
cloning loss. This loss is combined with the regular RL loss to make the policy simultaneously imitate
demonstrations and maximize the expected return. RLfD methods necessitate an adequate supply of
high-quality demonstrations to achieve sample-efficient learning, which can be time-consuming. In
addition, they are low-level representations of a policy. Consequently, if an agent fails to extract a
high-level strategy from these demonstrations, it will merely mimic the actions without acquiring a
generalizable policy. In contrast, our proposed KIAN enables an agent to learn with external policies
of arbitrary quality and fuse them by evaluating the importance of each policy to the task. Thus, the
agent must understand the high-level strategies of each policy rather than only imitating its actions.
Another research direction in RL focuses on utilizing sub-optimal external policies instead of
demonstrations to improve sample efficiency [25, 27, 36]. For instance, Zhang et al. [36] proposed
Knowledge-Guided Policy Network (KoGuN) that learns a neural network policy from fuzzy-rule
controllers. The neural network concatenates a state and all actions suggested by fuzzy-rule controllers
as an input and outputs a refined action. While effective, this method puts restrictions on the
representation of a policy to be a fuzzy logic network. On the other hand, Rajendran et al. [27]
presented A2T (Attend, Adapt, and Transfer), an attentive deep architecture that fuses multiple
policies and does not restrict the form of a policy. These policies can be non-primitive, and a learnable
internal policy is included. In A2T, an attention network takes a state as an input and outputs the
weights of all policies. The agent then samples an action from the fused distribution based on these
weights. The methods KoGuN and A2T are most related to our work. Based on their success, KIAN
further relaxes their requirement of retraining for incremental learning since both of them depend
on the preset number of policies. Additionally, our approach mitigates the entropy imbalance issue,
which can lead to inefficient exploration and was not addressed by KoGuN and A2T.
There exist other RL frameworks, such as hierarchical RL (HRL), that tackle tasks involving multiple
policies. However, these frameworks are less closely related to our work compared to the previously
mentioned methods. HRL approaches aim to decompose a complex task into a hierarchy of sub-tasks
and learn a sub-policy for each sub-task [2, 6, 13, 16–18, 20, 25, 31, 33]. On the other hand, KGRL
methods, including KoGuN, A2T, and KIAN, aim to address a task by observing a given set of
external policies. These policies may offer partial solutions, be overly intricate, or even have limited
relevance to the task at hand. Furthermore, HRL methods typically apply only one sub-policy to the
environment at each time step based on the high-level policy, which determines the sub-task the agent
is currently addressing. In contrast, KGRL seeks to simultaneously apply multiple policies within a
single time step by fusing them together.


3   Problem Formulation

Our goal is to investigate how RL can be grounded on any given set of external knowledge policies
to achieve knowledge-acquirable, sample-efficient, generalizable, compositional, and incremental
properties. We refer to this RL paradigm as Knowledge-Grounded Reinforcement Learning (KGRL).
A KGRL problem is a sequential decision-making problem that involves an environment, an agent,
and a set of external policies. It can be mathematically formulated as a Knowledge-Grounded Markov
Decision Process (KGMDP), which is defined by a tuple Mk = (S, A, T , R, ρ, γ, G), where S is
the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A × S → R is the transition probability distribution,
R is the reward function, ρ is the initial state distribution, γ is the discount factor, and G is the
set of external knowledge policies. An external knowledge set G contains n knowledge policies,
G = {πg1 , . . . , πgn }. Each knowledge policy is a function that maps from the state space to the action
space, πgj (·|·) : S → A, ∀ j = 1, . . . , n. A knowledge mapping is not necessarily designed for the
original Markov Decision Process (MDP), which is defined by the tuple M = (S, A, T , R, ρ, γ).
Therefore, applying πgj to M may result in a poor expected return.


                                                    3
The goal of KGRL is to find an optimal policy π ∗ (·|·; G) : S → A that maximizes the expected
                      PT
return: Es0 ∼ρ,T ,π∗ [ Pt=0 γ t Rt ]. Note that Mk and M share the same optimal value function,
                        ∞
V ∗ (s) = max ET ,π [ k=0 γ k Rt+k+1 |st = s], if they are provided with the same policy class Π.
           π∈Π

A well-trained KGRL agent can possess the following properties: knowledge-acquirable, sample-
efficient, generalizable, compositional, and incremental. Here we formally define these properties.
Definition 3.1 (Knowledge-Acquirable). An agent can acquire knowledge internally instead of only
following G. We refer to this internal knowledge as an inner policy and denote it as πin (·|·) : S → A.
Definition 3.2 (Sample-Efficient). An agent requires fewer samples to solve for Mk than for M.
Definition 3.3 (Generalizable). A learned policy π(·|·; G) can solve similar but different tasks.
Definition 3.4 (Compositional). Assume that other agents have solved for m KGMDPs,
M1k , . . . , Mm                                       1         m                            1          m
               k , with external knowledge sets, G , . . . , G , and inner policies, πin , . . . , πin . An
                                                                           ∗
agent S is compositional if it can learn to solve a KGMDP Mk with the external knowledge set
           m
G ∗ ⊆ i=1 G i ∪ {πin  1            m
                        , . . . , πin }.
Definition 3.5 (Incremental). An agent is incremental if it has the following two abilities: (1) Given
a KGMDP Mk for the agent to solve within T timesteps. The agent can learn to solve Mk with
the external knowledge sets, G1 , . . . , GT , where Gt , t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, is the knowledge set at time step
t, and Gt can be different from one another. (2) Given a sequence of KGMDPs M1k , . . . , Mm              k , the
agent can solve them with external knowledge sets, G 1 , . . . , G m , where G i , i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, is the
knowledge set for task i, and G i can be different from one another.

4     Knowledge-Inclusive Attention Network
                                                                                 Environment
We propose Knowledge-Inclusive Attention Net-
work (KIAN) as an actor for KGRL. KIAN
can be end-to-end trained with various RL algo-             action (at)                                 state (st)
rithms. Illustrated in Figure 2, KIAN comprises
three components: an inner actor, knowledge
keys, and a query. In this section, we first de-
scribe the architecture of KIAN and its action-             KIAN
prediction operation. Then we introduce entropy
imbalance, a problem that emerges in maximum
entropy KGRL, and propose modified policy
distributions for KIAN to alleviate this issue.
                                                                          u
                                                                   kin
                                                                              Knowledge   Knowledge   Knowledge
4.1   Model Architecture                                    Inner Actor         (g1)        (g2)        (g3)


Inner Actor. The inner actor serves the same
purpose as an actor in regular RL, represent-
ing the inner knowledge learned by the agent         Figure 2: The model architecture of KIAN.
through interactions with the environment. In
KIAN, the inner actor, denoted as πin (·|·; θ) : S → A, is a learnable function approximator with
parameter θ. The presence of the inner actor in KIAN is crucial for the agent to be capable of
acquiring knowledge, as it allows the agent to develop its own strategies. Therefore, even if the
external knowledge policies in G are unable to solve a particular task, the agent can still discover an
optimal solution.

Knowledge Keys. In KIAN, we introduce a learnable embedding vector for each knowledge
policy, including πin and πg1 , . . . , πgn , in order to create a unified representation space for all
knowledge policies. Specifically, for each knowledge mapping πin or πgj ∈ G, we assign a learnable
dk -dimensional vector as its key (embedding): kin ∈ Rdk or kgj ∈ Rdk ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}. It is
important to note that these knowledge keys, ke , represents the entire knowledge mapping πe , ∀e ∈
{in, g1 , . . . , gn }. Thus, ke is independent of specific states or actions. These knowledge keys and
the query will perform an attention operation to determine how an agent integrates all policies.
Our knowledge-key design is essential for an agent to be compositional and incremental. By unifying
the representation of policies through knowledge keys, we remove restrictions on the form of a


                                                       4
knowledge mapping. It can be any form, such as a lookup table of state-action pairs (demonstra-
tions) [21], if-else-based programs, fuzzy logics [36], or neural networks [25, 27]. In addition, the
knowledge keys are not ordered, so πg1 , . . . , πgn in G and their corresponding kg1 , . . . , kgn can
be freely rearranged. Finally, since a knowledge policy is encoded as a key independent of other
knowledge keys in a joint embedding space, replacing a policy in G means replacing a knowledge
key in the embedding space. This replacement requires no changes in the other part of KIAN’s
architecture. Therefore, an agent can update G anytime without relearning a significant part of KIAN.

Query. The last component in KIAN, the query, is a function approximator that generates dk -
dimensional vectors for knowledge-policy fusion. The query is learnable with parameter ϕ and is
state-dependent, so we denote it as Φ(·; ϕ) : S → Rdk . Given a state st ∈ S, the query outputs a
dk -dimensional vector ut = Φ(st ; ϕ) ∈ Rdk , which will be used to perform an attention operation
with all knowledge keys. This operation determines the weights of policies when fusing them.

4.2   Embedding-Based Attentive Action Prediction

The way to predict an action with KIAN and a set of external knowledge policies, G, is by three steps:
(1) calculating a weight for each knowledge policy using an embedding-based attention operation, (2)
fusing knowledge policies with these weights, and (3) sampling an action from the fused policy.

Embedding-Based Attention Operation. Given a state st ∈ S, KIAN predicts a weight for each
knowledge policy as how likely this policy will suggest a good action. These weights can be computed
by the dot product between the query and knowledge keys as:
                   wt,in = Φ(st ; ϕ) · kin /ct,in ∈ R,
                                                                                                         (1)
                   wt,gj = Φ(st ; ϕ) · kgj /ct,gj ∈ R,           ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}.
                  [ŵt,in , ŵt,g1 , . . . , ŵt,gn ]⊤ = softmax([wt,in , wt,g1 , . . . , wt,gn ]⊤ ).    (2)
where ct,in ∈ R and ct,gj ∈ R are normalization factors, for example, if ct,gj = ∥Φ(st ; ϕ)∥2 ∥kgj ∥2 ,
then wt,gj turns out to be the cosine similarity between Φ(st ; ϕ) and kgj . We refer to this operation as
an embedding-based attention operation since the query evaluates each knowledge key (embedding)
by equation (1) to determine how much attention an agent should pay to the corresponding knowledge
policy. If wt,in is larger than wt,gj , the agent relies more on its self-learned knowledge policy πin ;
otherwise, the agent depends more on the action suggested by the knowledge policy πgj . Note that
the computation of one weight is independent of other knowledge keys, so changing the number of
knowledge policies will not affect the relation among all remaining knowledge keys.

Action Prediction for A Discrete Action Space. An MDP (or KGMDP) with a discrete action
space usually involves choosing from da ∈ N different actions, so each knowledge policy maps from
a state to a da -dimensional probability simplex, πin : S → ∆da , πgj : S → ∆da ∀j = 1, . . . , n.
When choosing an action given a state st ∈ S, KIAN first predicts π(·|st ) ∈ ∆da ⊆ Rda with the
weights, ŵin , ŵg1 , . . . , ŵgn :
                               π(·|st ) = ŵin πin (·|st ) + Σnj=1 ŵgj πgj (·|st ),                     (3)
The final action is sampled as at ∼ π(·|st ), where the i-th element of π(·|st ) represents the probability
of sampling the i-th action.

Action Prediction for A Continuous Action Space. Each knowledge policy for a continuous
action space is a probability distribution that suggests a da -dimensional action for an agent to apply to
the task. As prior work [25], we model each knowledge policy as a multivariate normal distribution,
                          2                                  2
πin (·|st ) = N (µt,in , σt,in ), πgj (·|st ) = N (µt,gj , σt,gj
                                                                 ) ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, where µt,in ∈ Rda and
µt,gj ∈ R are the means, and σt,in ∈ R≥0 and σt,gj ∈ Rd≥0
            da                          2        da         2         a
                                                                        are the diagonals of the covariance
matrices. Note that we assume each random variable in an action is independent of one another.
A continuous policy fused as equation (3) becomes a mixture of normal distributions. To
sample an action from this mixture of distributions without losing the important informa-
tion provided by each distribution, we choose only one knowledge policy according to
the weights and sample an action from it. We first sample an element from the set


                                                          5
{in, g1 , . . . , gn } according to the weights, {ŵt,in , ŵt,g1 , . . . , ŵt,gn }, using Gumbel softmax [12]:
e ∼ gumbel_softmax([ŵt,in , ŵt,g1 , . . . , ŵt,gn ]⊤ ), in order to make KIAN differentiable every-
where. Then given a state st ∈ S, an action is sampled from the knowledge policy, at ∼ πe (·|st ),
using the reparameterization trick.
However, fusing multiple policies as equation (3) will make an agent biased toward a small set of
knowledge policies when exploring the environment in the context of maximum entropy KGRL.

4.3   Exploration in KGRL

Maximizing entropy is a commonly used approach to encourage exploration in RL [9, 10, 37].
However, in maximum entropy KGRL, when the entropy of policy distributions are different from one
another, it leads to the problem of entropy imbalance. Entropy imbalance is a phenomenon in which an
agent consistently selects only a single or a small set of knowledge policies. We show this in math by
first revisiting the formulation of maximum entropyP   RL. In maximum entropy RL, an entropy term is
added to the standard RL objective as π ∗ = argmax t E(st ,at ∼π) [R(st , at ) + αH(π(·|st ))] [9, 10],
                                                     π
where α ∈ R is a hyperparameter, and H(·) represents the entropy of a distribution. By maximizing
αH(π(·|st )), the policy becomes more uniform since the entropy of a probability distribution is
maximized when it is a uniform distribution [19]. With this in mind, we show that in maximum
entropy KGRL, some of the weights in {ŵt,in , ŵt,g1 , . . . , ŵt,gn } might always be larger than others.
We provide the proofs of all propositions in Appendix A.
Proposition 4.1 (Entropy imbalance in discrete decision-making). Assume that a da -dimensional
probability simplex π ∈ ∆da is fused by {π1 , . .P
                                                 . , πm } and {ŵ1 , . . . , ŵm } following equation (3),
                                                    m
where πj ∈ ∆da , ŵj ≥ 0 ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , m} and j=1 ŵj = 1. If the entropy of π is maximized and
∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥π2 ∥∞ , ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥π3 ∥∞ , . . . , ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥πm ∥∞ , then ŵ1 → 1.

We show in Proposition A.1 that if π1 is more uniform than πj , then ∥π1 ∥∞ < ∥πj ∥∞ .
Proposition 4.2 (Entropy imbalance in continuous control). Assume a one-dimensional policy
distribution π is fused by
        π = ŵ1 π1 + ŵ2 π2 , where πj = N (µj , σj2 ), ŵj ≥ 0 ∀j ∈ {1, 2}, and ŵ1 + ŵ2 = 1.             (4)

If the variance of π is maximized, and σ12 ≫ σ22 and σ12 ≫ (µ1 − µ2 )2 , then ŵ1 → 1.

We can also infer from Proposition 4.2 that the variance of π defined in equation (4) depends on the
distance between µ1 and µ2 , which leads to Proposition 4.3.
Proposition 4.3 (Distribution separation in continuous control). Assume a one-dimensional policy
distribution π is fused by equation (4). If ŵ1 , ŵ2 , σ12 , and σ22 are fixed, then maximizing the variance
of π will increase the distance between µ1 and µ2 .

Proposition 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3 indicate that in maximum entropy KGRL, (1) the agent will pay more
attention to the policy with large entropy, and (2) in continuous control, an agent with a learnable
internal policy will rely on this policy and separate it as far away as possible from other policies.
The consistently imbalanced attention prevents the agent from exploring the environment with other
policies that might provide helpful suggestions to solve the task. Furthermore, in continuous control,
the distribution separation can make π perform even worse than learning without any external
knowledge. The reason is that external policies, although possibly being sub-optimal for the task,
might be more efficient in approaching the goal, and moving away from those policies means being
less efficient when exploring the environment.

4.4   Modified Policy Distributions

Proposition 4.1 and 4.2 show that fusing multiple policies with equation (3) can make a KGRL agent
rely on a learnable internal policy for exploration. However, the uniformity of the internal policy is
often desired since it encourages exploration in the state-action space that is not covered by external
policies. Therefore, we keep the internal policy unchanged and propose methods to modify external
policy distributions in KIAN to resolve the entropy imbalance issue. We provide the detailed learning
algorithm of KGRL with KIAN in Appendix A.6.


                                                         6
Discrete Policy Distribution.      We modify a fusion of discrete policy distributions in equation (3) as
                   π(·|st ) = ŵt,in πin (·|st ) + Σnj=1 ŵt,gj softmax(βt,gj πgj (·|st )),             (5)
                               Φ(st ) · kin                Φ(st ) · kgj
                   wt,in =                     , wt,gj =                   ,                            (6)
                             ∥Φ(st )∥2 ∥kin ∥2           ∥Φ(st )∥2 ∥kgj ∥2
                   βt,gj = ∥Φ(st )∥2 ∥kgj ∥2       ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n},                                 (7)
where βt,gj ∈ R is a state-and-knowledge dependent variable that scales πgj (·|st ) to change its
uniformity after passing through softmax. If the value of βt,gj decreases, the uniformity, i.e., the
entropy, of softmax(βt,gj πgj (·|st )) increases. By introducing βt,gj , the entropy of knowledge
policies becomes adjustable, resulting in reduced bias towards the internal policy during exploration.

Continuous Action Probability. We modify the probability of sampling at ∈ Rda from a continu-
ous π(·|st ) in equation (3) as
                        π(at |st ) = ŵin πin (at,in |st ) + Σnj=1 ŵgj πgj (µt,gj |st ),               (8)
where at,in ∼ πin (·|st ) and µt,gj ∈ Rda is the mean of πgj (·|st ). We show in the next proposition
that equation (8) is an approximation of
                           π(at |st ) = ŵin πin (at |st ) + Σnj=1 ŵgj πgj (at |st ),                  (9)
which is the exact probability of sampling at ∈ Rda from a continuous π(·|st ) in equation (3).
Proposition 4.4 (Approximation of a mixture of normal distributions). If the following three
inequalities hold for µt,in , µt,g1 , . . . , µt,gn , and at,in : ∥µt,in − µt,gj ∥2 < min{γt,in , γt,gj },
∥at,in − µt,in ∥2 < min{γt,in , γt,gj }, and ∥at,in − µt,gj ∥2 < γt,gj , ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, where
γt,in = 1/(2πin (µt,in |st )) and γt,gj = 1/(2πgj (µt,gj |st )), then equation (9) for a real-valued
action at sampled from KIAN can be approximated by
                                                      Xn
     ŵt,in U(at ; µt,in − γt,in , µt,in + γt,in ) +     ŵt,gj U(at ; µt,in − γt,gj , µt,in + γt,gj ), (10)
                                                     j=1

     where U(·; a, b) = 1/(b − a).                                                                     (11)
In addition, equation (8) is a lower bound of equation (10).
With equation (8), we can show that maximizing the variance of π(·|st ) will not separate the policy
distributions. Hence, an agent can refer to external policies for efficient exploration and learn its own
refined strategy based on them.
Proposition 4.5 (Maximized variance’s independence of the distance between means). Assume a
one-dimensional policy π is fused by equation (4). If π(a|s) is approximated as equation (8), and
the three inequalities in Proposition 4.4 are satisfied, then maximizing the variance of π(·|s) will not
affect the distance between µ1 and µ2 .

5   Experiments
We evaluate KIAN on two sets of environments with discrete and continuous action spaces: Mini-
Grid [5] and OpenAI-Robotics [24]. Through experiments, we answer the following four questions:
[Sample Efficiency] Does KIAN require fewer training samples to solve a task than other external-
policy-inclusive methods? [Generalizability] Can KIAN trained on one task be directly used to solve
another task? [Compositional and Incremental Learning] Can KIAN combine previously learned
knowledge keys and inner policies to learn a new task? After adding more external policies to G, can
most of the components from a trained KIAN be reused for learning?
For comparison, we implement the following five methods as our baselines: behavior cloning
(BC) [3], RL [10, 29], RL+BC [21], KoGuN [36], and A2T [27]. KoGuN and A2T are modified to be
compositional and applicable in both discrete and continuous action spaces. Moreover, all methods
(BC, RL+BC, KoGuN, A2T, and KIAN) are equipped with the same initial external knowledge set,
G init , for each task. This knowledge set comprises sub-optimal if-else-based programs that cannot
complete a task themselves, e.g., pickup_a_key or move_forward_to_the_goal. G init will be
expanded with learned policies in compositional- and incremental-learning experiments. We provide
the experimental details in Appendix B.


                                                       7
Figure 3: The learning curves of sample efficiency experiments in MiniGrid (top 2 rows) and OpenAI-
Robotics (last row) environments. Given a knowledge set that cannot complete a task (as shown by
BC), KIAN exhibits better sample efficiency across all tasks. These results underline the effectiveness
of KIAN in leveraging external policies to mitigate the need for extensive training samples.

  Train in       Empty-Random-5x5        DoorKey-5x5        Push          Slide       Pick-and-Place
  Test in        6x6   8x8 16x16         8x8  16x16       5x    10x     5x    10x      5x      10x
  RL [10, 29]    0.88   0.71    0.45     0.29    0.08    0.87   0.52   0.45    0.17   0.34     0.27
  RL+BC [21]     0.87   0.60    0.24     0.40    0.09    0.89   0.60   0.44    0.16   0.34     0.30
  KoGuN [36]     0.94   0.83    0.53     0.77    0.35    0.63   0.43   0.55    0.18   0.32     0.24
  A2T [27]       0.92   0.78    0.51     0.53    0.11    0.03   0.05   0.00    0.01   0.01     0.06
  KIAN (ours)    0.96   0.91    0.93     0.76    0.42    0.93   0.70   0.42    0.15   0.92     0.72

Table 1: (Zero-Shot S2C Experiments) The left five columns show the generalizability results of
an agent trained in a 5x5 environment and tested in environments of varying sizes. The right six
columns show the results of an agent trained with a 1x goal range and tested with different goal
ranges. Transferring policies from a simple task to a more complex one is a challenging setup in
generalizability experiments. The results highlight the superior performance of KIAN in such setup.

5.1   Sample Efficiency and Generalizability

We study the sample efficiency of baselines and KIAN under the intra-task setup, where an agent
learns a single task with the external knowledge set G init fixed. Figure 3 plots the learning curves in
different environments. All experiments in these figures are run with ten random seeds, and each error
band is a 95% confidence interval. The results of BC show that the external knowledge policies are
sub-optimal for all environments. Given sub-optimal external knowledge, only KIAN shows success
in all environments. In general, improvement of KIAN over baselines is more apparent when the task
is more complex, e.g., Empty < Unlock < DoorKey and Push < Pick-and-Place. Moreover, KIAN is
more stable than baselines in most environments. Note that in continuous-control tasks (Push, Slide,
and Pick-and-Place), A2T barely succeeds since it does not consider the entropy imbalance issue
introduced in Proposition 4.2 and 4.3. These results suggest that KIAN can more efficiently explore
the environment with external knowledge policies and fuse multiple policies to solve a task.
Next, we evaluate the generalizability of all methods under simple-to-complex (S2C) and complex-to-
simple (C2S) setups, where the former trains a policy in a simple task and test it in a complex one,


                                                   8
               Train in             DoorKey-5x5                           DoorKey-8x8                               Pick-and-Place                   Push           Slide
               Test in             Empty-Random                       Unlock DoorKey5x5                             Reach Push                       Reach          Push
               RL [10, 29]                    0.83                      0.92                 0.93                    0.80          0.31                  0.16       0.09
               RL+BC [21]                     0.85                      0.87                 0.93                    0.80          0.31                  0.16       0.09
               KoGuN [36]                     0.90                      0.91                 0.93                    0.45          0.05                  0.20       0.07
               A2T [27]                       0.84                      0.92                 0.93                    0.01          0.05                  0.20       0.05
               KIAN (ours)                    0.91                      0.94                 0.95                    1.00          0.30                  0.24       0.13

Table 2: (Zero-Shot C2S Experiments) In general, KIAN outperforms other methods when transfer-
ring policies across different tasks. Note that although distinguishing the levels of difficulty between
Push, Slide, and Pick-and-Place is not straightforward, KIAN still achieves better performance.

                             KIAN (for reference)                   Cont. RL            Cont. KoGuN                    Cont. A2T                Cont. KIAN
               Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16                     Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16                     Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16
                 -> LavaCrossingS9N2                         -> MultiRoom-N4-S5                          -> KeyCorridorS3R2                              Push -> Pick-and-Place
                                                                                                                                               1.0
                                                    0.50
Reward




                                           Reward




                                                                                        Reward




                                                                                                                                      Reward
         0.5                                                                                     0.5                                           0.5
                                                    0.25
         0.0                                        0.00                                         0.0                                           0.0
               0.0         0.5      1.0                    0       1      2     3                      0.0          0.5         1.0                  0              2             4
                        Timesteps   1e6                            Timesteps      1e5                            Timesteps      1e6                             Timesteps    1e5
                          Unlock                                  DoorKey-8x8                                   DoorKey-8x8
                     -> DoorKey-8x8                            -> MultiRoom-N4-S5                            -> KeyCorridorS3R2                              Slide -> Push
         1.0                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                    0.50
Reward




                                           Reward




                                                                                        Reward




                                                                                                                                      Reward
         0.5                                                                                     0.5                                           0.5
                                                    0.25
         0.0                                        0.00                                         0.0                                           0.0
               0          2          4                     0       1     2       3                     0.0          0.5         1.0                  0              2             4
                       Timesteps     1e5                           Timesteps      1e5                            Timesteps      1e6                             Timesteps    1e5


Figure 4: The learning curves of composition and incremental experiments in MiniGrid (left 3
columns) and OpenAI-Robotics (right column) environments. KIAN requires fewer samples to learn
two tasks sequentially than separately and outperforms other approaches in incremental learning.


and the latter goes the opposite way. All generalizability experiments are run with the same policies
as in Section 5.1. Table 1 and 2 show that KIAN outperforms other baselines in most experiments,
and its results have a smaller variance (see Table 3 to 5 in Appendix E). These results demonstrate
that KIAN’s flexibility in incorporating external policies improves generalizability.


5.2            Compositional and Incremental Learning

In the final experiments, we test different methods in the compositional and incremental learning
setting. We modify RL, KoGuN, and A2T to fit into this setting; details can be found in Appendix C.
The experiments follow the inter-task setup: (1) We randomly select a pair of tasks (M1k , M2k ).
(2) An agent learns a policy to solve M1k with G init fixed, as done in Section 5.1. (3) The learned
                    1
(internal) policy, πin , is added to the external knowledge set, G = G init ∪ {πin
                                                                                1
                                                                                   }. (4) The same agent
                              2
learns a policy to solve Mk with G. Each experiment is run with ten random seeds.
The learning curves in Figure 4 demonstrate that given the same updated G, KIAN requires fewer
samples to solve M2k than RL, KoGuN, and A2T in all experiments. Our knowledge-key and query
design disentangles policy representations from the action-prediction operation, so the agent is more
optimized in incremental learning. Unlike our disentangled design, prior methods use a single
function approximator to directly predict an action (KoGuN) or the weight of each policy (A2T) given
a state. These methods make the action-prediction operation depend on the number of knowledge
policies, so changing the size of G requires significant retraining of the entire function approximator.
Figure 4 also shows that KIAN solves M2k more efficiently with G than G init in most experiments.
This improvement can be attributed to KIAN reusing the knowledge keys and query, which allows an
agent to know which policies to fuse under different scenarios. Note that G can be further expanded
with the internal policy learned in M2k and be used to solve another task M3k .


                                                                                        9
Figure 5: The learning curves of KIAN with and without addressing entropy imbalance as described
in Section 4.4. The results indicate the adverse impact of entropy imbalance on KIAN’s performance
within the context of maximum entropy KGRL. In addition, our proposed modifications to external
policy distributions are shown to be highly effective in alleviating this issue.

5.3   Analysis of Entropy Imbalance in Maximum Entropy KGRL

In our ablation study, we investigate (1) the impact of entropy imbalance on the performance of
maximum entropy KGRL and (2) whether the proposed modifications to external policy distributions
in Section 4.4 can alleviate the issue.
Figure 5 shows the learning curves comparing KIAN’s performance with and without addressing
the entropy-imbalance issue. The results demonstrate that when not addressing the issue using
equation (5) or (8), KIAN fails to fully capitalize on the guidance offered by external policies. We
also draw two noteworthy conclusions from the figure: (1) For discrete decision-making tasks, the
detrimental impact of entropy imbalance becomes more evident as task complexity increases. (2) For
continuous-control tasks, entropy imbalance can degrade KIAN’s performance and make it perform
worse than pure RL without external policies, as shown by the results of FetchPickAndPlace and
FetchPush. This phenomenon can be attributed to Proposition 4.3. In contrast, by adjusting KIAN’s
external policy distributions using equation (5) or (8), a KGRL agent can efficiently harness external
policies to solve a given task.

6     Conclusion and Discussion
This work introduces KGRL, an RL paradigm aiming to enhance efficient and flexible learning by
harnessing external policies. We propose KIAN as an actor model for KGRL, which predicts an
action by fusing multiple policies with an embedding-based attention operation. Furthermore, we
propose modifications to KIAN’s policy distributions to address entropy imbalance, which hinders
efficient exploration with external policies in maximum entropy KGRL. Our experimental findings
demonstrate that KIAN outperforms alternative methods incorporating external policies regarding
sample efficiency, generalizability, and compositional and incremental learning.
However, it is essential to acknowledge a limitation not addressed in this work. The efficiency of
KIAN, as well as other existing KGRL methods, may decrease when dealing with a large external
knowledge set containing irrelevant policies. This issue is examined and discussed in Appendix F.
Efficiently handling extensive sets of external policies is left for future research.
Our research represents an initial step towards the overarching goal of KGRL: learning a knowledge
set with a diverse range of policies. These knowledge policies can be shared across various environ-
ments and continuously expanded, allowing artificial agents to flexibly query and learn from them.
We provide detailed discussions on the broader impact of this work and outline potential directions of
future research in Appendix D.


                                                 10
References
 [1] Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
     Reincarnating reinforcement learning: Reusing prior computation to accelerate progress. Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:28955–28971, 2022.
 [2] Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
 [3] Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence 15,
     1995.
 [4] A. Bandura. Social Learning Theory. Prentice-Hall series in social learning theory. Prentice Hall, 1977.
     ISBN 9780138167516.
 [5] Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment for
     openai gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.
 [6] Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 5, 1992.
 [7] Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese,
     Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, et al. Magnetic control of tokamak
     plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7897):414–419, 2022.
 [8] Vinicius G Goecks, Gregory M Gremillion, Vernon J Lawhern, John Valasek, and Nicholas R Waytowich.
     Integrating behavior cloning and reinforcement learning for improved performance in dense and sparse
     reward environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04281, 2019.
 [9] Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with deep
     energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1352–1361. PMLR, 2017.
[10] Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
     entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In ICML, 2018.
[11] Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Andrew Sendonaris,
     Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Ian Osband, John Agapiou, et al. Learning from demonstrations for real world
     reinforcement learning. 2017.
[12] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
[13] Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy, and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstraction for
     hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
[14] Leslie Pack Kaelbling. The foundation of efficient robot learning. Science, 369(6506):915–916, 2020.
[15] Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre Quillen,
     Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement learning for
     vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 651–673. PMLR, 2018.
[16] Khimya Khetarpal and Doina Precup. Learning options with interest functions. In Proceedings of the
     AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 9955–9956, 2019.
[17] Jaekyeom Kim, Seohong Park, and Gunhee Kim. Unsupervised skill discovery with bottleneck option
     learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14305, 2021.
[18] Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep reinforce-
     ment learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information
     processing systems, 29, 2016.
[19] David JC MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge university press,
     2003.
[20] Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning for
     hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01257, 2018.
[21] Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcoming
     exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In 2018 IEEE international conference on
     robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 6292–6299. IEEE, 2018.


                                                     11
[22] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
     Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
     learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

[23] Mark Pfeiffer, Samarth Shukla, Matteo Turchetta, Cesar Cadena, Andreas Krause, Roland Siegwart, and
     Juan Nieto. Reinforced imitation: Sample efficient deep reinforcement learning for mapless navigation by
     leveraging prior demonstrations. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 3(4):4423–4430, 2018.

[24] Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell, Jonas
     Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Chal-
     lenging robotics environments and request for research. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09464, 2018.

[25] Ahmed H. Qureshi, Jacob J. Johnson, Yuzhe Qin, Taylor Henderson, Byron Boots, and Michael C. Yip.
     Composing task-agnostic policies with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
     Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1ezFREtwH.

[26] Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dormann.
     Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning
     Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html.

[27] Janarthanan Rajendran, Aravind Lakshminarayanan, Mitesh M. Khapra, Prasanna P, and Balaraman
     Ravindran. Attend, adapt and transfer: Attentive deep architecture for adaptive transfer from multiple
     sources in the same domain. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017. URL
     https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy6iJDqlx.
[28] Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel Todorov,
     and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and
     demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.

[29] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
     optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

[30] Seungmoon Song, Łukasz Kidziński, Xue Bin Peng, Carmichael Ong, Jennifer Hicks, Sergey Levine,
     Christopher G Atkeson, and Scott L Delp. Deep reinforcement learning for modeling human locomotion
     control in neuromechanical simulation. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, 18(1):1–17, 2021.

[31] Martin Stolle and Doina Precup. Learning options in reinforcement learning. In International Symposium
     on abstraction, reformulation, and approximation, pages 212–223. Springer, 2002.
[32] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

[33] Wei-Cheng Tseng, Jin-Siang Lin, Yao-Min Feng, and Min Sun. Toward robust long range policy transfer.
     In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 9958–9966, 2021.
[34] Mel Vecerik, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nicolas Heess,
     Thomas Rothörl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin Riedmiller. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforce-
     ment learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.

[35] Peter R Wurman, Samuel Barrett, Kenta Kawamoto, James MacGlashan, Kaushik Subramanian, Thomas J
     Walsh, Roberto Capobianco, Alisa Devlic, Franziska Eckert, Florian Fuchs, et al. Outracing champion
     gran turismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7896):223–228, 2022.

[36] Peng Zhang, Jianye Hao, Weixun Wang, Hongyao Tang, Yi Ma, Yihai Duan, and Yan Zheng. Kogun:
     Accelerating deep reinforcement learning via integrating human suboptimal knowledge. In International
     Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.

[37] Brian D Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal entropy.
     Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.




                                                     12
A     Proofs and Learning Algorithms of KIAN
A.1    Proof of Proposition 4.1
Proposition 4.1 (Entropy imbalance in discrete decision-making). Assume that a da -dimensional probability
simplex π ∈ ∆da is fusedP  by {π1 , . . . , πm } and {ŵ1 , . . . , ŵm } following equation (3), where πj ∈ ∆da , ŵj ≥
0 ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , m} and m  j=1 ŵj = 1. If the entropy of π is maximized and ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥π2 ∥∞ , ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪
∥π3 ∥∞ , . . . , ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥πm ∥∞ , then ŵ1 → 1.

Proof. Since π ∈ ∆da is defined as equation (3), and its entropy is maximized,
                                         m                          ⊤
                                        X                1        1
                                    π=       ŵj πj =       ,...,       .                                          (12)
                                        j=1
                                                         da       da

Equation (12) holds since π becomes a uniform distribution if its entropy is maximized.
Since each πj in equation (12) is a probability simplex, it can be written as
                                                                             ⊤
                                   1           1                   1
                          πj =        + εj,1 ,    + εj,2 , . . . ,    + εj,da    , where                           (13)
                                  da           da                  da
                                            da
                                            X
                                                  εj,i = 0      ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , m}.                               (14)
                                            i=1

Substituting equation (13) into equation (12) and, after some rearrangement, we get
                                       ⊤               ⊤ X  m                                       ⊤
          1                  1               1         1                  1                   1
   ŵ1      + ε1,1 , . . . ,    + ε1,da   =     ,...,       −       ŵj      + εj,1 , . . . ,    + εj,da    .      (15)
         da                  da              da       da       j=2
                                                                          da                  da

Without loss of generality, we can assume that
                                                        max      ε1,i = ε1,1                                       (16)
                                                   i∈{1,...,da }

                               min        εj,i = εj,1     and      εj,1 ≤ 0 ∀j ∈ {2, . . . , m}.                   (17)
                           i∈{1,...,da }

Then take the infinity norm for both sides of equation (15), we get
                                      ⊤                    ⊤ X   m                                      ⊤
        1                   1                     1        1                  1                   1
  ŵ1      + ε1,1 , . . . ,    + ε1,da     =         ,...,       −      ŵj      + εj,1 , . . . ,    + εj,da
        da                  da                    da       da       j=2
                                                                              da                  da
                                             ∞                                                                      ∞
                                                                                                                   (18)
                                                                m                
                                          1                   1   X        1
                                ŵ1          + ε1,1       =     −    ŵj      + εj,1 .                             (19)
                                          da                  da j=2       da

After some rearrangement, equation (19) becomes
                                     m
                                            !                 m
                                1 X                       1   X
                                         ŵj + ŵ1 ε1,1 =   −    ŵj εj,1                                          (20)
                               da j=1                     da j=2
                                                                   m
                                                                   X
                                                  ŵ1 ε1,1 = −           ŵj εj,1 .                                (21)
                                                                   j=2
                            Pm
Equation (21) holds since      j=1 ŵj = 1.

Given equation (14), (17), and the assumption that ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥π2 ∥∞ , ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪ ∥π3 ∥∞ , . . . , ∥π1 ∥∞ ≪
∥πm ∥∞ , we have the following inequalities
                                           ε1,1 ≪ −εj,1         ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , m}.                               (22)
Hence, for equation (21) to hold, ŵ1 → 1.

Proposition 4.1 states that if ∥π1 ∥∞ is much smaller than ∥πj ∥∞ , then maximizing the entropy of π results in
ŵ1 → 1 and ŵj → 0, ∀j ∈ {2, . . . , m}. Next, we provide another proposition showing that if π1 is a uniform
distribution and πj is not, then ∥π1 ∥∞ < ∥πj ∥∞ , ∀j ∈ {2, . . . , m}.
Proposition A.1 (Infinity norm of a probability simplex). Given two da -dimensional probability simplices,
π1 ∈ ∆da and π2 ∈ ∆da , if π1 is a uniform distribution and π2 is not, then ∥π1 ∥∞ = d1a < ∥π2 ∥∞ .


                                                                13
Proof. Since π1 ∈ ∆da is a uniform distribution, π1 = [ d1a , d1a , . . . , d1a ]⊤ . The infinity norm of π1 becomes
                                                                                    1
                                         ∥π1 ∥∞ =          max          |π1,i | =      ,                        (23)
                                                        i∈{1,...,da }               da
where π1,i is the i-th element of π1 . On the other hand, since π2 ∈ ∆da is not a uniform distribution, it can be
represented as
                                                                              ⊤
                                   1            1                   1
                           π2 =        + ε2,1 ,    + ε2,2 , . . . ,    + ε2,da    , where                    (24)
                                   da           da                  da
                                da
                                X
                                      ε2,i = 0 and {ε2,1 , . . . , ε2,da |ε2,i ̸= 0} ̸= ∅.                      (25)
                                i=1

Equation (25) indicates that at least one element in {ε2,1 , . . . , ε2,da } should be larger than 0. Hence,
                                                                                  1           1
                          ∥π2 ∥∞ =        max         |π2,i | =      max             + ε2,i >    .              (26)
                                      i∈{1,...,da }               i∈{1,...,da }   da          da



A.2    Proof of Proposition 4.2
In continuous action space, the final policy fused by equation (3) is a mixture of normal distributions, also known
as a Gaussian mixture. However, in general, the entropy of a Gaussian mixture does not have a closed form [45].
Instead of analyzing the entropy of π, we analyze the variance of π for da = 1 in maximum entropy KGRL
since for any probability density function of a real-valued random variable, Shannon’s inequality for entropy and
variance [44, 47] specifies
                                                      1           1
                                            H(π) ≤ ln 2pσ 2 + ,                                                 (27)
                                                      2                2
         2
where σ ∈ R≥0 is the variance of π and p ≈ 3.14159.
Proposition 4.2 (Entropy imbalance in continuous control). Assume a one-dimensional policy distribution π is
fused by
            π = ŵ1 π1 + ŵ2 π2 , where πj = N (µj , σj2 ), ŵj ≥ 0 ∀j ∈ {1, 2}, and ŵ1 + ŵ2 = 1.             (28)
If the variance of π is maximized, and σ12 ≫ σ22 and σ12 ≫ (µ1 − µ2 )2 , then ŵ1 → 1.

Proof. Let a be a continuous random variable with the probability density function being π(·|s). Then its first
and second moments are
                                      Z
                           Ea∼π [a] = aπ(·|s) da                                                          (29)
                                      Z
                                    = a (ŵ1 π1 (a|s) + ŵ2 π2 (a|s)) da                                  (30)
                                          Z                      Z
                                    = ŵ1 aπ1 (a|s) da + ŵ2 aπ2 (a|s) da                                 (31)

                                     = ŵ1 µ1 + ŵ2 µ2                                                          (32)
                                       Z
                            Ea∼π a = a2 π(·|s) da
                                 2
                                                                                                                (33)
                                       Z
                                     = a2 (ŵ1 π1 (a|s) + ŵ2 π2 (a|s)) da                                      (34)
                                           Z                    Z
                                     = ŵ1 a2 π1 (a|s) da + ŵ2 a2 π2 (a|s) da                                  (35)

                                     = ŵ1 (µ21 + σ12 ) + ŵ2 (µ22 + σ22 ).                               (36)
                                                               2
Equation (36) holds since σj2 = Eaj ∼πj [a2j ] − Eaj ∼πj [aj ] , ∀j ∈ {1, 2}. The variance of a thus becomes
                                                              

               Va∼π [a] = Ea∼π a2 − (Ea∼π [a])2
                                  
                                                                                                          (37)
                           = ŵ1 (µ21 + σ12 ) + ŵ2 (µ22 + σ22 ) − (ŵ1 µ1 + ŵ2 µ2 )2                          (38)
                           = ŵ1 σ12 + ŵ2 σ22 + ŵ1 (1 − ŵ1 )µ21 + ŵ2 (1 − ŵ2 )µ22 − 2ŵ1 ŵ2 µ1 µ2         (39)
                           = ŵ1 σ12 + ŵ2 σ22 + ŵ1 ŵ2 (µ21 + µ22 − 2µ1 µ2 )                                  (40)
                           = ŵ1 σ12 + ŵ2 σ22 + ŵ1 ŵ2 (µ1 − µ2 )2 .                                          (41)
According to equation (41), if σ12 ≫ σ22 and σ12 ≫ (µ1 − µ2 )2 , maximizing Va∼π [a] leads to ŵ1 → 1.


                                                              14
A.3    Proof of Proposition 4.3
Proposition 4.3 (Distribution separation in continuous control). Assume a one-dimensional policy distribution
π is fused by equation (4). If ŵ1 , ŵ2 , σ12 , and σ22 are fixed, then maximizing the variance of π will increase the
distance between µ1 and µ2 .

Proof. According to equation (41), if ŵ1 , ŵ2 , σ12 , and σ22 are fixed, maximizing Va∼π [a] results in maximizing
(µ1 − µ2 )2 , hence increasing the distance between µ1 and µ2 .

A.4    Proof of Proposition 4.4
Before proving Proposition 4.4, we first show that KL divergence between a mixture of uniform distributions
and a mixture of normal distributions is upper-bounded by a constant.
Proposition A.2 (KL divergence between a mixture of uniform distributions and a Gaussian mixture). Given a
Gaussian mixture
                                                           m
                                                           X
                                               π(·) =            ŵj N (·; µj , σj2 ),                            (42)
                                                           j=1

                                                             1        −(x − µj )2
                                  where N (x; µj , σj2 ) = q      exp                                             (43)
                                                            2pσj2        2σj2

and a mixture of m uniform distributions
                                                    m
                                                    X
                                          π̂(·) =         ŵj U(·; µj − γj , µj + γj ),                           (44)
                                                    j=1
                                                           1                              1
                              where U(·; a, b) =                     and γj =                                     (45)
                                                          b−a                      2 N (µj ; µj , σj2 )
                                                                                                  p
for a real-valued random variable, the KL divergence between π̂(·) and π(·) has an upper bound of 12 .

Proof. Since KL divergence DKL (P ∥Q) is convex in the pair (P, Q), DKL (π̂∥π) has the following upper
bound [43]
                                   m                                m
                                                                                          !
                                  X                                X                  2
              DKL (π̂∥π) = DKL       ŵj U(·; µj − γj , µj + γj )     ŵj N (·; µj , σj )         (46)
                                             j=1                                           j=1
                                    m
                                    X
                                                                                         N (·; µj , σj2 ) .
                                                                                                         
                                ≤         ŵj DKL U(·; µj − γj , µj + γj )                                        (47)
                                    j=1


For each j ∈ {1, . . . , m},

                DKL U(·; µj − γj , µj + γj ) N (·; µj , σj2 )
                                                              
                                                                                                                  (48)
                    Z µj +γj                    1
                             1                 2γj
                  =             ln                             dx                                               (49)
                     µj −γj 2γj     q 1
                                                   (x−µj )2
                                         2
                                            exp − 2σ2
                                              2pσj                     j
                                                                                                   
                       Z µj +γj                           Z µj +γj
                                     1      1                           1        1      (x − µj )2 
                   =                    ln     dx −                          ln q      −              dx          (50)
                        µj −γj      2γj    2γj              µj −γj     2γj       2pσ 2      2σj2
                                                                                            j
                                                     Z µj +γj
                           1          1                            (x − µj )2
                   = ln       − ln q       +                                  dx                                  (51)
                          2γj        2pσ 2            µj −γj         4γj σj2
                                               j

                           1          1      γj2
                   = ln       − ln q       + 2                                                                    (52)
                          2γj        2pσ 2  6σj
                                               j
                       p
                   =      .                                                                                       (53)
                       12
Equation (53) comes from substituting γj into equation (52).


                                                                  15
Finally, the upper bound of DKL (π̂∥π) becomes
                                          m
                                          X
                                                                                              N (·; µj , σj2 )
                                                                                                                 
                       DKL (π̂∥π) ≤              ŵj DKL U(·; µj − γj , µj + γj )                                               (54)
                                          j=1
                                          m
                                          X            p    p
                                      =          ŵj      =    .                                                                (55)
                                          j=1
                                                       12   12



Proposition 4.4 (Approximation of a mixture of normal distributions). If the following three inequalities
hold for µt,in , µt,g1 , . . . , µt,gn , and at,in : ∥µt,in − µt,gj ∥2 < min{γt,in , γt,gj }, ∥at,in − µt,in ∥2 <
min{γt,in , γt,gj }, and ∥at,in − µt,gj ∥2 < γt,gj , ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, where γt,in = 1/(2πin (µt,in |st )) and
γt,gj = 1/(2πgj (µt,gj |st )), then equation (9) for a real-valued action at sampled from KIAN can be approxi-
mated by
                                                                   n
                                                                   X
            ŵt,in U(at ; µt,in − γt,in , µt,in + γt,in ) +              ŵt,gj U(at ; µt,in − γt,gj , µt,in + γt,gj ),         (56)
                                                                   j=1

            where U(·; a, b) = 1/(b − a).                                                                                       (57)
In addition, equation (8) is a lower bound of equation (10).

Proof. Proposition A.2 shows that π(·|st ) fused as equation (3) can be approximated by
                                                                         n
                                                                         X
      π̂(·|st ) = ŵt,in U(·; µt,in − γt,in , µt,in + γt,in ) +                ŵt,gj U(·; µt,gj − γt,gj , µt,gj + γt,gj )      (58)
                                                                         j=1

                                 p
with KL divergence being at most 12 , which is a constant.
Since any continuous action at outputted by KIAN belongs to {at,in , µt,g1 , . . . , µt,gn } (Line 11 to 16 in
Algorithm 1), if the three inequalities in the proposition statement hold, then for all at
                                                                 1
                      U(at ; µt,in − γt,in , µt,in + γt,in ) =        ,                                                         (59)
                                                               2γt,in
                                                                 1
                      U(at ; µt,gj − γt,gj , µt,gj + γt,gj ) =          ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, and                                (60)
                                                               2γt,gj
                                                                 1
                      U(at ; µt,in − γt,gj , µt,in + γt,gj ) =          ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , n}.                                    (61)
                                                               2γt,gj
Therefore, π̂(·|st ) can be rewritten as
                                                                        n
                                                                        X
      π̂(·|st ) = ŵt,in U(·; µt,in − γt,in , µt,in + γt,in ) +                ŵt,gj U(·; µt,in − γt,gj , µt,in + γt,gj ).     (62)
                                                                        j=1

For any at ∈ {at,in , µt,g1 , . . . , µt,gn },
                                                                         n
                                                                         X
   π̂(at |st ) = ŵt,in U(at ; µt,in − γt,in , µt,in + γt,in ) +                ŵt,gj U(at ; µt,in − γt,gj , µt,in + γt,gj )   (63)
                                                                         j=1
                                 n
                           1     X           1
              = ŵt,in         +    ŵt,gj                                                                                      (64)
                         2γt,in j=1        2γt,gj
                                            n
                                            X
              = ŵt,in πin (µt,in |st ) +         ŵt,gj πgj (µt,gj |st )                                                       (65)
                                            j=1
                                            n
                                            X
              ≥ ŵt,in πin (at,in |st ) +         ŵt,gj πgj (µt,gj |st ).                                                      (66)
                                            j=1

Inequality (66) holds since πin (at |st ) has a maximum value when at = µt,in , and it shows that equation (8) is
a lower bound of equation (10).

We use equation (8) instead of (10) to approximated equation (9) since it includes more information about the
                                                                  2
distribution πin (·|st ) and helps adjust the learnable variance σt,in .


                                                                   16
     A.5    Proof of Proposition 4.5
     Proposition 4.5 (Maximized variance’s independence of the distance between means). Assume a one-
     dimensional policy π is fused by equation (4). If π(a|s) is approximated as equation (8), and the three
     inequalities in Proposition 4.4 are satisfied, then maximizing the variance of π(·|s) will not affect the distance
     between µ1 and µ2 .

     Proof. Proposition 4.4 shows that approximating π(a|s) as equation (8) comes from approximating π(·|s) with
                            π̂(·|s) = ŵ1 U(·; µ1 − γ1 , µ1 + γ1 ) + ŵ2 U(·; µ1 − γ2 , µ1 + γ2 ).                (67)

     Let a be a continuous random variable with the probability density function being π̂(·|s). Following the proof of
     Proposition 4.2, its first and second moments are
                                            Ea∼π̂ [a] = µ1                                                        (68)
                                                                   γ2      γ2
                                            Ea∼π̂ [a2 ] = µ21 + ŵ1 1 + ŵ2 2 .                                   (69)
                                                                    3       3
                                                                    2
     Equation (69) holds since the variance of U(·; a, b) is (b−a)
                                                               12
                                                                   . Then the variance of a becomes
                                                                γ12      γ2
                                              Va∼π̂ [a] = ŵ1       + ŵ2 2                                       (70)
                                                                 3        3
                                                         p
                                                        =  (ŵ1 σ12 + ŵ2 σ22 ),                                  (71)
                                                         6
     which is not related to the distance between µ1 and µ2 .

     A.6    Learning Algorithms for KIAN

   Algorithm 1: Knowledge-Grounded RL with KIAN
   Input: environment E with a KGMDP (S, A, T , G, R, ρ, γ), where G = {πg1 , πg2 , . . . , πgn }
 1 Initialize θ, ϕ, and ke , ∀e ∈ {in, g1 , . . . , gn }
 2 Observe a state s0 ∈ S from E
 3 for each time step t do
       // Compute weights for all knowledge policies
 4      if A is a discrete action space then
 5          Compute win , wg1 , . . . , wgn according to equation (6)
 6      else if A is a continuous action space then
 7          Compute win , wg1 , . . . , wgn according to equation (1) with
              ct,e = 1, ∀e ∈ {in, g1 , . . . , gn }
 8      Compute ŵin , ŵg1 , . . . , ŵgn according to (2)
       // Sample an action
 9      if A is a discrete action space then
10          Sample an action at ∼ π(·|st ), with π following equation (5)
11      else if A is a continuous action space then
12          Sample a knowledge policy e ∼ gumbel_softmax([ŵt,in , ŵt,g1 , . . . , ŵt,gn ]⊤ )
13          if e = in then
14               Sample an action at ∼ πin (·|st )
15          else
16               at = µe,t
     // Apply the action to the environment
17    Apply at ∈ A to E and observe a reward Rt and the next state st+1 ∈ S
     // Update KIAN
18    if A is a discrete action space then
19        Compute entropy-related term with π(·|st ) following equation (5)
20    else if A is a continuous action space then
21        Compute entropy-related term with π(at |st ) following equation (8)
22    Update θ, ϕ, and kin , kg1 , . . . , kgn with any (maximum entropy) RL algorithm
   Output: θ, ϕ, and kin , kg1 , . . . , kgn



                                                             17
B     Experimental Details
All experiments are conducted using Pytorch [22].

B.1     Baseline Algorithms
We compare KIAN with the following baselines that incorporate external knowledge policies differently.

        • Behavior cloning (BC) [3]: An agent follows only the policies in G to solve a task. This method is
          the optimal solution for supervised learning from demonstrations, where external knowledge policies
          generate the demonstrations.
        • RL [10, 29]: An agent learns a policy by RL without any external guidance.
        • RL+BC [21]: An agent learns a policy by RL with BC signals integrated. These signals come from
          demonstrations generated by external knowledge policies.
        • KoGuN [36]: An agent learns a policy with the input being a concatenation of a state and n actions
          suggested by all policies in G.
        • A2T [27]: An agent fuses a learnable inner policy with n external policies in G by learning a function
          approximator that predicts n + 1 weights for all policies.

B.2     MiniGrid Environments
B.2.1    Environmental Details
We evaluate all methods on the following tasks in MiniGrid environments (https://github.com/maximecb/
gym-minigrid): Empty-Random-5x5, Unlock, DoorKey-5x5, DoorKey-8x8, Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16,
LavaCrossingS9N2, MultiRoom-N4-S5, and KeyCorridorS3R2. A state st in each task is a directed first-
person view represented as a 5x5 grid. An action at in each task is one of the six discrete actions: left, right,
forward, pickup, drop, and toggle.

B.2.2    Initial External Knowledge Set
The initial external knowledge set, G init , for MiniGrid tasks comprises eight sub-optimal if-else-based programs,
such as:

        • pick_up_the_key: If there exists a key in st , move to the key; if the key is in front of the agent,
          πgj (pickup|st ) = 1.
        • pick_up_the_ball: If there exists a ball in st , move to the key; if the key is in front of the agent,
          πgj (pickup|st ) = 1.
        • open_the_door: If there exists a door in st , move to the door; if the door is in front of the agent,
          πgj (toggle|st ) = 1.
        • open_the_locked_door: If there exists a locked door in st , move to the door; if the door is in front
          of the agent, πgj (toggle|st ) = 1.
        • open_the_unlocked_door: If there exists a unlocked door in st , move to the door; if the door is in
          front of the agent, πgj (toggle|st ) = 1.
        • go_to_the_goal: If there exists a goal in st , move to the goal.
        • do_not_hit_walls: If there exists walls around the agent, do not choose the direction.
        • do_not_hit_balls: If there exists balls around the agent, do not choose the direction.

In the above policies, the ‘move to‘ is decided by pobj − pself , where pself ∈ R3 is the position of the agent
and pobj ∈ R3 is the position of the object. The πgj of the actions right, left, and forward, can be written as:
                             
                             πgj (right|st ) = 1,
                                                         if pobj,x − pself,x > 0
                               πgj (lef t|st ) = 1,       if pobj,x − pself,x < 0                             (72)
                                                              obj,y − pself,y > 0
                             
                             π (f orward|s ) = 1, if p
                                 gj              t


B.2.3    Model Architecture
The eight environments in Minigrid share the same model architecture. Each method involves learning an image
encoding, an actor and a critic networks. The architecture of the image encoding network and critic network are
the same for all methods, but their actor networks have different architectures.


                                                       18
Image Encoding Network. The image encoding network is a three-layer convolutional neural network that
maps an input image to an image embedding, which is used as the state by actor and critic networks.

Critic Network. A critic network is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that predicts a state value [29]. The
architecture of a critic network has one hidden layer that contains 64 units. Each hidden layer is followed by
Tanh activation.

Actor Network of PPO, PPO+BC, and KoGuN. An actor network of PPO, PPO+BC and KoGuN is an
MLP with one hidden layers and a hidden size of 64 units.

Actor Network of A2T. An actor network of A2T contains an internal actor network and an attention
network. The internal actor network has the same architecture as an actor of PPO, PPO+BC, and KoGuN. The
attention network is an MLP with one hidden layer and a hidden size of 64 units base.

KIAN. The internal actor network of KIAN has the same architecture as an actor of PPO, PPO+BC, and
KoGuN. Each knowledge key is a learnable vector with dk = 8 and modeled by the PyTorch module,
nn.Embedding. The query network is an additional output layer projecting 64-dim to dk -dim that based
on the inner actor’s first layer outputs.

B.2.4    Hyperparameters
We implement all methods based on the implementation of PPO in https://github.com/lcswillems/
rl-starter-files. The training timesteps are 75K, 300K, 75K, 3M, 300K, 5M, 500K, 1M for
Empty-Random-5x5, Unlock, DoorKey-5x5, DoorKey-8x8, Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16, LavaCrossingS9N2,
MultiRoom-N4-S5, and KeyCorridorS3R2 respectively. The learning rates are 1 × 10−3 for all tasks. The batch
sizes are 256 for all tasks. The discount factors γ = 0.99 for all tasks. The coefficient of the entropy term α is
searched to be 0 or 0.01, the default value.

B.3     OpenAI-Robotic Environments
B.3.1    Environmental Details
We evaluate all methods on the following tasks in OpenAI-Robotic environments: FetchPush, FetchSlide, and
FetchPickAndPlace. A state st ∈ R25 in each task contains (1) the position and velocity of the end-effector, (2)
the position, rotation, and velocity of the object, (3) the relative position between the object and the end-effector,
and (4) the distance between the two grippers and their velocity. An action at ∈ R4 in each task contains the
position variation of the end-effector and the distance between the two grippers.

B.3.2    Initial External Knowledge Set
The initial external knowledge set, G init , for all OpenAI-Robotic tasks comprises two sub-optimal if-else-based
programs, move_forward_to_the_object and move_forward_to_the_goal.

        • move_forward_to_the_object: If ∥pee − pobj ∥2 ≥ ε, move straightly to the object with the
          gripper opened; otherwise, stay unmoved.
        • move_forward_to_the_goal: If ∥pee − pobj ∥2 < ε, move straightly to the goal with the gripper
          closed; otherwise, stay unmoved.

In the above two policies, pee ∈ R3 is the position of the end-effector, and pobj ∈ R3 is the position of the
object. For all tasks, ε = 0.03.

B.3.3    Model Architecture
FetchPush, FetchSlide, and FetchPickAndPlace share the same model architecture. Each method involves
learning an actor and a critic network. The architecture of the critic network is the same for all methods, but
their actor networks have different architectures.

Critic Network. A critic network is a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that predicts a state-action value [? ].
The architecture of a critic network has three hidden layers, and each layer contains 512 units. Each hidden layer
is followed by ReLU activation.

Actor Network of SAC, SAC+BC, and KoGuN. An actor network of SAC, SAC+BC and KoGuN is an
MLP with three hidden layers and a hidden size of 512 units.


                                                         19
Actor Network of A2T. An actor network of A2T contains an internal actor network and an attention
network. The internal actor network has the same architecture as an actor of SAC, SAC+BC, and KoGuN. The
attention network is an MLP with two hidden layers and a hidden size of 64 units.

KIAN. The internal actor network of KIAN has the same architecture as an actor of SAC, SAC+BC,
and KoGuN. Each knowledge key is a learnable vector with dk = 4 and modeled by the PyTorch module,
nn.Embedding. The query network is an MLP with two hidden layers and a hidden size of 64 units.

B.3.4    Hyperparameters
We implement all methods based on the implementation of SAC in Stable-Baselines3 (SB3) [26]. The training
timesteps are 1M for FetchPush and FetchPickAndPlace and 1.2M for FetchSlide. The learning rates are
5 × 10−4 for FetchPush and FetchPickAndPlace and 4 × 10−4 for FetchSlide. The batch sizes are 2048 for all
tasks. The replay-buffer sizes are 1M for all tasks. The discount factors γ = 0.95 for all tasks. The coefficient
of the entropy term α is adjusted automatically for all tasks as described in [10].


C     Details of Compositional and Incremental Experiments
C.1     MiniGrid Environments
After learning an actor in M1k with the experimental setup described in Section B, we train KIAN for M2k by
initializing its external knowledge keys with the knowledge keys learned in M1k , and they remain fixed when
learning in M2k . All other components of KIAN are learned from scratch in M2k . This setup allows us to test
the efficacy of reusing learned knowledge keys across different tasks. All actor components of RL, KoGuN, and
A2T are learned from scratch in M2k since RL does not incorporate any external knowledge, and the model
architectures of KoGuN and A2T depend on the number and order of knowledge policies. The hyperparameters
of learning M1k and M2k are the same as those listed in Section B.2.4.

        • Setup1: Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16 to LavaCrossingS9N2. reuse the learned knowledge embedding of
          “go to the goal”; reuse the learned knowledge embedding of “do not hit balls” as the fixed knowledge
          embedding of “do not hit lava”.
        • Setup2: Unlock to DoorKey-8x8. reuse the learned knowledge embedding of “get the key” and “open
          the door”.
        • Setup3: Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16 to MultiRoom-N4-S5. reuse the learned knowledge embedding of
          “go to the goal”.
        • Setup4: Unlock to MultiRoom-N4-S5. reuse the learned knowledge embedding of “open the door” as
          the fixed knowledge embedding of “open the unlocked door”.
        • Setup5: Dynamic-Obstacles-16x16 to KeyCorridorS3R2. reuse the learned knowledge embedding of
          “go to the goal” as the fixed knowledge embedding of “pick up the ball”.
        • Setup6: DoorKey-8x8 to KeyCorridorS3R2. reuse the learned knowledge embedding of “get the key”;
          reuse the learned knowledge embedding of “open the door” as the fixed knowledge embedding of
          “??”; reuse the learned knowledge embedding of “go to the goal” as the fixed knowledge embedding of
          “pick up the ball”.

C.2     OpenAI-Robotic Environments
After learning an actor and a critic in M1k with the experimental setup described in Section B, we initialize the
networks for M2k as follows:

        • RL: The actor and critic of M2k are initialized with that of M1k . These networks will be updated when
          learning in M2k .
        • KoGuN: Only the critic of M2k is initialized with that of M1k . The actor is learned from scratch in
          M2k . The actor and critic will be updated when learning in M2k .
        • A2T: The critic of M2k is initialized with that of M1k . The inner policy and attention network are
          learned from scratch in M2k . All networks will be updated when learning in M2k .
        • KIAN: The external knowledge keys, query, and critic of M2k are initialized with that of M1k . Note
          that the external knowledge keys of M2k include the internal and external knowledge keys from M1k .
          The inner policy and inner knowledge key are learned from scratch in M2k . The external knowledge
          keys remain fixed, while other networks will be updated when learning in M2k .


                                                       20
The hyperparameters of learning M1k are the same as those listed in Section B.3.4. When learning M2k ,
the hyperparameters changed are listed as follows: The training timesteps are 0.4M. The learning rates are
7.5 × 10−4 and 10−3 for FetchPush and FetchPickAndPlace respectively.


D    Broader Impact and Future Research Directions
The KGRL framework presented in this work aims to enhance an agent’s ability to learn from external policies.
These policies encompass not only sub-optimal strategies to task completion but also regulative policies that
emphasize safety constraints and ethical behaviors. Being able to incorporate safety- and ethics-oriented policies
gives KGRL the potential to significantly influence an artificial agent’s behavior, promoting enhanced safety
and social acceptability. These aspects have gained substantial attention in the field of RL [38–42, 46, 48],
underscoring their importance in contemporary research.
Moving forward, there are several research directions in KGRL that are worth exploring. First, fusing knowledge
policies with different state and action spaces enables efficient learning across a broader range of applications.
Second, integrating regulative policies that enforce strict constraints during learning and inference stages can
ensure adherence to safety and ethical considerations. Lastly, addressing complex relationships among different
policies, such as conditional dependence and conflicts, allows an agent to efficiently navigate through a large and
diverse set of knowledge policies. We hope these directions have the potential to inspire future studies in KGRL.


E    Other Experimental Results
We provide the standard deviation for the experiments of generalizability in Table 3-5.

                        Train in             Empty-Random-5x5                        DoorKey-5x5
                        Test in             6x6     8x8   16x16                      8x8    16x16
                        RL [10, 29]        .88±.06      .71±.20        .45±.35    .29±.16    .08±.10
                        RL+BC [21]         .87±.03      .60±.14        .24±.17    .40±.01    .09±.08
                        KoGuN [36]         .94±.01      .83±.03        .53±.11    .77±.09    .35±.08
                        A2T [27]           .92±.01      .78±.11        .51±.30    .53±.09    .11±.03
                        KIAN (ours)        .96±.02      .91±.01        .93±.02    .76±.01    .42±.08

                              Table 3: MiniGrid Zero-Shot S2C Experiments.

                   Train in                Push                        Slide            Pick-and-Place
                   Test in            5x          10x             5x           10x       5x       10x
                   RL [10, 29]      .87±.05      .52±.11     .45±.07        .17±.05    .34±.54    .27±.44
                   RL+BC [21]       .89±.02      .60±.09     .44±.10        .16±.02    .34±.55    .30±.50
                   KoGuN [36]       .63±.49      .43±.32     .55±.07        .18±.04    .32±.52    .24±.38
                   A2T [27]         .03±.00      .05±.00     .00±.00        .01±.00    .01±.00    .06±.00
                   KIAN (ours)      .93±.05      .70±.02     .42±.10        .15±.04    .92±.00    .72±.03

                        Table 4: OpenAI-Robotics Zero-Shot S2C Experiments.

    Train in          DoorKey-5x5               DoorKey-8x8                      Pick-and-Place        Push      Slide
    Test in          Empty-Random           Unlock DoorKey5x5                    Reach    Push         Reach     Push
    RL [10, 29]           .83±.07             .92±.01        .93±.01             .80±.45    .31±.19    .16±.10   .09±.04
    RL+BC [21]            .85±.05             .87±.03        .93±.01             .80±.45    .31±.19    .16±.10   .09±.04
    KoGuN [36]            .90±.02             .91±.01        .93±.01             .45±.37    .05±.02    .20±.07   .07±.02
    A2T [27]              .84±.04             .92±.01        .93±.00             .01±.00    .05±.00    .20±.45   .05±.00
    KIAN (ours)           .91±.01             .94±.01        .95±.00             1.0±.00    .30±.04    .24±.06   .13±.02

                                    Table 5: Zero-Shot C2S Experiments.


F    Effects of Extensive External Knowledge Set with Irrelevant Policies
In order for KGRL agents to effectively leverage an external knowledge set, it is imperative that they can (1)
distinguish which external policies are less related to the given task and (2) efficiently navigate through an


                                                            21
extensive collection of external policies. Failure to accomplish these objectives in a timely manner could result in
suboptimal performance, potentially even inferior to that of an RL agent. Under such circumstances, integrating
external policies into the learning process becomes impractical.
In this section, we examine the following two aspects
of KIAN: (1) the ability of KIAN to rapidly acquire                         PPO
valuable strategies, even in the presence of random                         PPO+KIAN
or irrelevant policies within the external knowledge                        PPO+KIAN+Redundant2x
set, and (2) the impact of KIAN’s performance as the
size of the external knowledge set increases.                               PPO+KIAN+Redundant3x
Figure 6 shows the learning curves of PPO and
                                                                      1.0              Unlock
PPO+KIAN, considering various numbers of external
policies: 2 relevant, 4 (2 relevant + 2 irrelevant), and
6 (2 relevant + 4 irrelevant) for the MiniGrid Unlock




                                                             Reward
task. The results indicate that including more irrele-
vant knowledge policies leads to a marginal decline in                0.5
performance, but the agents consistently achieve high
rewards with minimal variances. This minor decline

                                                                      0.0
in performance aligns with our expectations since the
agents need to (1) navigate through a more extensive
set of external policies and (2) distinguish and dis-                       0        1     2                3
regard policies that do not contribute to solving the
task. Therefore, when the external knowledge set is                                 Timesteps   1e5
very large, KGRL methods, such as KoGuN, A2T,
and KIAN, do not guarantee superior efficiency over Figure 6: Learning curves of PPO and PPO+KIAN
RL methods. Efficiently harnessing a large external for the MiniGrid Unlock task, with external knowl-
policy set remains an avenue of future research and edge sets that include irrelevant policies.
exploration.




                                                        22
Reference
[38] Richard Cheng, Gábor Orosz, Richard M Murray, and Joel W Burdick. End-to-end safe reinforcement
     learning through barrier functions for safety-critical continuous control tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 3387–3395, 2019.

[39] Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. A lyapunov-based
     approach to safe reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

[40] Dongsheng Ding, Xiaohan Wei, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Mihailo Jovanovic. Provably efficient
     safe exploration via primal-dual policy optimization. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     and Statistics, pages 3304–3312. PMLR, 2021.

[41] Adrien Ecoffet and Joel Lehman. Reinforcement learning under moral uncertainty. In International
     conference on machine learning, pages 2926–2936. PMLR, 2021.
[42] Javier Garcia and Fernando Fernández. Safe exploration of state and action spaces in reinforcement
     learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 45:515–564, 2012.

[43] John R Hershey and Peder A Olsen. Approximating the kullback leibler divergence between gaussian
     mixture models. In 2007 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing-
     ICASSP’07, volume 4, pages IV–317. IEEE, 2007.

[44] Isidore I Hirschman. A note on entropy. American journal of mathematics, 79(1):152–156, 1957.

[45] Marco F Huber, Tim Bailey, Hugh Durrant-Whyte, and Uwe D Hanebeck. On entropy approximation for
     gaussian mixture random vectors. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on Multisensor Fusion and
     Integration for Intelligent Systems, pages 181–188. IEEE, 2008.

[46] Puze Liu, Davide Tateo, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Jan Peters. Robot reinforcement learning on the
     constraint manifold. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1357–1366. PMLR, 2022.

[47] Claude E Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical journal, 27(3):
     379–423, 1948.
[48] Yueh-Hua Wu and Shou-De Lin. A low-cost ethics shaping approach for designing reinforcement learning
     agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.




                                                       23
