                                         Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




                                         I NFINITY GAN: T OWARDS I NFINITE -P IXEL
                                         I MAGE S YNTHESIS
                                          Chieh Hubert Lin1 Hsin-Ying Lee2 Yen-Chi Cheng3 Sergey Tulyakov2 Ming-Hsuan Yang1,4,5
                                          1
                                           UC Merced 2 Snap Inc. 3 Carnegie Mellon University 4 Yonsei University 5 Google Research



                                                                                              A BSTRACT
                                                         We present a novel framework, InfinityGAN, for arbitrary-sized image generation.
arXiv:2104.03963v4 [cs.CV] 11 Mar 2022




                                                         The task is associated with several key challenges. First, scaling existing models
                                                         to an arbitrarily large image size is resource-constrained, in terms of both compu-
                                                         tation and availability of large-field-of-view training data. InfinityGAN trains and
                                                         infers in a seamless patch-by-patch manner with low computational resources.
                                                         Second, large images should be locally and globally consistent, avoid repetitive
                                                         patterns, and look realistic. To address these, InfinityGAN disentangles global ap-
                                                         pearances, local structures, and textures. With this formulation, we can generate
                                                         images with spatial size and level of details not attainable before. Experimen-
                                                         tal evaluation validates that InfinityGAN generates images with superior realism
                                                         compared to baselines and features parallelizable inference. Finally, we show
                                                         several applications unlocked by our approach, such as spatial style fusion, multi-
                                                         modal outpainting, and image inbetweening. All applications can be operated
                                                         with arbitrary input and output sizes.
                                                                                    Style A                                                               Style B




                                             Training Patch Size
                                                 (101x101)




                                                                   Style A                                                                Style B
                                         Figure 1: Synthesizing infinite-pixel images from finite-sized training data. A 1024×2048
                                         image composed of 242 patches, independently synthesized by InfinityGAN with spatial fusion of
                                         two styles. The generator is trained on 101×101 patches (e.g., marked in top-left) sampled from
                                         197×197 real images. Note that training and inference (of any size) are performed on a single GTX
                                         TITAN X GPU. Zoom-in for better experience.

                                         1        I NTRODUCTION
                                                         ”To infinity and beyond!”                                                                  – Buzz Lightyear
                                         Generative models witness substantial improvements in resolution and level of details. Most im-
                                         provements come at a price of increased training time (Gulrajani et al., 2017; Mescheder et al.,
                                         2018), larger model size (Balaji et al., 2021), and stricter data requirements (Karras et al., 2018).
                                         The most recent works synthesize images at 1024×1024 resolution featuring a high level of details
                                                 All codes, datasets, and trained models are publicly available. Project page: https://hubert0527.github.io/infinityGAN/



                                                                                                                 1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




and fidelity. However, models generating high resolution images usually still synthesize images of
limited field-of-view bounded by the training data. It is not straightforward to scale these models to
generate images of arbitrarily large field-of-view. Synthesizing infinite-pixel images is constrained
by the finite nature of resources. Finite computational resources (e.g., memory and training time) set
bounds for input receptive field and output size. A further limitation is that there exists no infinite-
pixel image dataset. Thus, to generate infinite-pixel images, a model should learn the implicit global
structure without direct supervision and under limited computational resources.
Repetitive texture synthesis methods (Efros & Leung, 1999; Xian et al., 2018) generalize to large
spatial sizes. Yet, such methods are not able to synthesize real-world images. Recent works, such
as SinGAN (Shaham et al., 2019) and InGAN (Shocher et al., 2019), learn an internal patch distri-
bution for image synthesis. Although these models can generate images with arbitrary shapes, in
Section 4.1, we show that they do not infer structural relationships well, and fail to construct plau-
sible holistic views with spatially extended latent space. A different approach, COCO-GAN (Lin
et al., 2019), learns a coordinate-conditioned patch distribution for image synthesis. As shown in
Figure 4, despite the ability to slightly extend images beyond the learned boundary, it fails to main-
tain the global coherence of the generated images when scaling to a 2× larger generation size.
How to generate infinite-pixel images? Humans are able to guess the whole scene given a partial
observation of it. In a similar fashion, we aim to build a generator that trains with image patches, and
inference images of unbounded arbitrary-large size. An example of a synthesized scene containing
globally-plausible structure and heterogeneous textures is shown in Figure 1.
We propose InfinityGAN, a method that trains on a finite-pixel dataset, while generating infinite-
pixel images at inference time. InfinityGAN consists of a neural implicit function, termed structure
synthesizer, and a padding-free StyleGAN2 generator, dubbed texture synthesizer. Given a global
appearance of an infinite-pixel image, the structure synthesizer samples a sub-region using coor-
dinates and synthesizes an intermediate local structural representations. The texture synthesizer
then seamlessly synthesizes the final image by parts after filling the fine local textures to the local
structural representations. InfinityGAN can infer a compelling global composition of a scene with
realistic local details. Trained on small patches, InfinityGAN achieves high-quality, seamless and
arbitrarily-sized outputs with low computational resources—a single TITAN X to train and test.
We conduct extensive experiments to validate the proposed method. Qualitatively, we present the
everlastingly long landscape images. Quantitatively, we evaluate InfinityGAN and related methods
using user study and a proposed ScaleInv FID metric. Furthermore, we demonstrate the efficiency
and efficacy of the proposed methods with several applications. First, we demonstrate the flexibility
and controllability of the proposed method by spatially fusing structures and textures from different
distributions within an image. Second, we show that our model is an effective deep image prior
for the image outpainting task with the image inversion technique and achieves multi-modal out-
painting of arbitrary length from arbitrarily-shaped inputs. Third, with the proposed model we can
divide-and-conquer the full image generation into independent patch generation and achieve 7.2×
of inference speed-up with parallel computing, which is critical for high-resolution image synthesis.
2   R ELATED W ORK
Latent generative models. Existing generative models are mostly designed to synthesize images
of fixed sizes. A few methods (Karras et al., 2018; 2020) have been recently developed to train latent
generative models on high-resolution images, up to 1024×1024 pixels. However, latent generative
models generate images from dense latent vectors that require synthesizing all structural contents at
once. Bounded by computational resources and limited by the learning framework and architecture,
these approaches synthesize images of certain sizes and are non-trivial to generalize to different out-
put size. In contrast, patch-based GANs trained on image patches (Lin et al., 2019; Shaham et al.,
2019; Shocher et al., 2019) are less constrained by the resource bottleneck with the synthesis-by-part
approach. However, (Shaham et al., 2019; Shocher et al., 2019) can only model and repeat internal
statistics of a single image, and (Lin et al., 2019) can barely extrapolate few patches beyond the
training size. ALIS (Skorokhodov et al., 2021) is a concurrent work that also explores synthesiz-
ing infinite-pixel images. It recursively inbetweens latent variable pairs in the horizontal direction.
We further discuss the method in Appendix A. Finally, autoregressive models (Oord et al., 2016;
Razavi et al., 2019; Esser et al., 2021) can theoretically synthesize at arbitrary image sizes. Despite
(Razavi et al., 2019) and (Esser et al., 2021) showing unconditional images synthesis at 1024×1024
resolution, their application in infinite-pixel image synthesis has not yet been well-explored.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




                          Section 3.2                                        Section 3.3                 Implicit Image (Infinitely Large)         Section 3.5
    Global Latent (zg)                                                                                                                                      Real Full Image




                                                                                                                                             Synthesized
                                                                                                                                              Patch (𝑝𝑐 )

                                                                              Figure 3




                                                                         Randomized Noises (zn)                                                      Discriminator

                                           Structure Synthesizer (𝐺S )   Texture Synthesizer (𝐺T )
     Local Latent (zl)   Coordinates (c)
                                               (Implicit Function)        (Fully-Convolutional)

                                                                                                                          𝐿𝑎𝑟 (Equation 5)     coordinate        𝐿𝑎𝑑𝑣


Figure 2: Overview. The generator of InfinityGAN consists of two modules, a structure synthesizer
based on a neural implicit function, and a fully-convolutional texture synthesizer with all positional
information removed (see Figure 3). The two networks take four sets of inputs, a global latent
variable that defines the holistic appearance of the image, a local latent variable that represents
the local and structural variation, a continuous coordinate for learning the neural implicit structure
synthesizer, and a set of randomized noises to model fine-grained texture. InfinityGAN synthesizes
images of arbitrary size by learning spatially extensible representations.

Conditional generative models. Numerous tasks such as image super-resolution, semantic image
synthesis, and image extrapolation often showcase results over 1024×1024 pixels. These tasks
are less related to our setting, as most structural information is already provided in the conditional
inputs. We illustrate and compare the characteristics of these tasks against ours in Appendix B.
Image outpainting. Image outpainting (Abdal et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Sabini & Rusak, 2018;
Yang et al., 2019) is related to image inpainting (Liu et al., 2018a; Yu et al., 2019) and shares similar
issues that the generator tends to copy-and-paraphrase the conditional input or create mottled textural
samples, leading to repetitive results especially when the outpainted region is large. InOut (Cheng
et al., 2021) proposes to outpaint image with GANs inversion and yield results with higher diversity.
We show that with InfinityGAN as the deep image prior along with InOut (Cheng et al., 2021), we
obtain the state-of-the-art outpainting results and avoids the need of sequential outpainting. Then,
we demonstrate applications in arbitrary-distant image inbetweening, which is at the intersection of
image inpainting (Liu et al., 2018a; Nazeri et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019) and outpainting research.
Neural implicit representation. Neural implicit functions (Park et al., 2019; Mescheder et al.,
2019; Mildenhall et al., 2020) have been applied to model the structural information of 3D and con-
tinuous representations. Adopting neural implicit modeling, our query-by-coordinate synthesizer is
able to model structural information effectively. Some recent works (DeVries et al., 2021; Niemeyer
& Geiger, 2021; Chan et al., 2021) also attempt to integrate neural implicit function into generative
models, but aiming at 3D-structure modeling instead of extending the synthesis field-of-view.

3       P ROPOSED M ETHOD
3.1        OVERVIEW
An arbitrarily large image can be described globally and locally. Globally, images should be coher-
ent and hence global characteristics should be expressible by a compact holistic appearance (e.g., a
medieval landscape, ocean view panorama). Therefore, we adopt a fixed holistic appearance for
each infinite-pixel image to represent the high-level composition and content of the scene. Locally,
a close-up view of an image is defined by its local structure and texture. The structure represents
objects, shapes and their arrangement within a local region. Once the structure is defined, there
exist multiple feasible appearances or textures to render realistic scenes. At the same time, struc-
ture and texture should conform to the global holistic appearance to maintain the visual consistency
among the neighboring patches. Given these assumptions, we can generate an infinite-pixel image
by first sampling a global holistic appearance, then spatially extending local structures and textures
following the holistic appearance.
Accordingly, the InfinityGAN generator G consists of a structure synthesizer GS and a texture syn-
thesizer GT . GS is an implicit function that samples a sub-region with coordinates and creates local
structural features. GT is a fully convolutional StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020) modeling textural
properties for local patches and rendering final image. Both modules follow a consistent holistic
appearance throughout the process. Figure 2 presents the overview of our framework.


                                                                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




3.2 S TRUCTURE S YNTHESIZER (GS )
Structure synthesizer is a neural implicit function driven by three sets of latent variables: A global
latent vector zg representing the holistic appearance of the infinite-pixel image (also called implicit
image since the whole image is never explicitly sampled), a local latent tensor zl expressing the
local structural variation of the image content, and a coordinate grid c specifying the location of the
patches to sample from the implicit image. The synthesis process is formulated as:
                                          zS = GS (zg , zl , c),                                       (1)
where zS denotes the structural latent variable that is later used as an input to the texture synthesizer.
We sample zg ∈ RDzg from a unit Gaussian distribution once and inject zg into every layer and pixel
in GS via feature modulation (Huang & Belongie, 2017; Karras et al., 2020). As local variations are
independent across the spatial dimension, we independently sample them from a unit Gaussian prior
for each spatial position of zl ∈ RH×W ×Dzl , where H and W can be arbitrarily extended.
We then use coordinate grid c to specify the location of the target patches to be sampled. To be able
to condition GS with coordinates infinitely far from the origin, we introduce a prior by exploiting the
nature of landscape images: (a) self-similarity for the horizontal direction, and (b) rapid saturation
(e.g., land, sky or ocean) for the vertical direction. To implement this, we use the positional encoding
for the horizontal axis similar to (Vaswani et al., 2017; Tancik et al., 2020; Sitzmann et al., 2020).
We use both sine and cosine functions to encode each coordinate for numerical stability. For the
vertical axis, to represent saturation, we apply the tanh function. Formally, given horizontal and
vertical indexes (ix , iy ) of zl tensor, we encode them as c = (tanh(iy ), cos(ix /T ), sin(ix /T )) ,
where T is the period of the sine function and c controls the location of the patch to generate.
To prevent the model from ignoring the variation of zl and generating repetitive content by following
the periodically repeating coordinates, we adopt a mode-seeking diversity loss (Mao et al., 2019; Lee
et al., 2020) between a pair of local latent variables zl1 and zl2 while sharing the same zg and c:
                     Ldiv = kzl1 − zl2 k1 / kGS (zg , zl1 , c) − GS (zg , zl2 , c)k1 .              (2)

Conventional neural implicit functions produce outputs for each input query independently, which
is a pixel in zl for InfinityGAN. Such a design causes training instabilities and slows convergence,
as we show in Figure 37. We therefore adopt the feature unfolding technique (Chen et al., 2021) to
enable GS to account for the information in a broader neighboring region of zl and c, introducing
a larger receptive field. For each layer in GS , before feeding forward to the next layer, we apply
a k × k feature unfolding transformation at each location (i, j) of the origin input f to obtain the
unfolded input f 0 :        0
                          f(i,j) = Concat({f (i + n, j + m)}n,m∈{−k/2,k/2} ) ,                    (3)
where Concat(·) concatenates the unfolded vectors in the channel dimension. In practice, as the grid-
shaped zl and c are sampled with equal spacing between consecutive pixels, the feature unfolding
can be efficiently implemented with CoordConv (Liu et al., 2018b).

3.3 T EXTURE S YNTHESIZER (GT )
Texture synthesizer aims to model various realizations of local texture given the local structure
zS generated by the structure synthesizer. In addition to the holistic appearance zg and the local
structural latent zS , texture synthesizer uses noise vectors zn to model the finest-grained textural
variations that are difficult to capture by other variables. The generation process can be written as:
                                          pc = GT (zS , zg , zn ) ,                                 (4)
where pc is a generated patch at location c (i.e., the c used in Eq 1 for generating zS ).
We implement upon StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2020). First, we replace the fixed constant input with
the generated structure zS . Similar to StyleGAN2, randomized noises zn are added to all layers of
GT , representing the local variations of fine-grained textures. Then, a mapping layer projects zg to
a style vector, and the style is injected into all pixels in each layer via feature modulation. Finally,
we remove all zero-paddings from the generator, as shown in Figure 3(b).
Both zero-padding and GS can provide positional information to the generator, and we later show
that positional information is important for generator learning in Section 4.2. However, it is nec-
essary to remove all zero-paddings from GT for three major reasons. First, zero-padding has a
consistent pattern during training, due to the fixed training image size. Such a behavior misleads


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




                      (a) Conventional Generator                                          (b) Padding-Free Generator
                                                                                                                                               Features
                                        Patch A Patch B                                                  Patch A Patch B

 Local Latent                                                                              X   Y     Z    Pad       Pad      X   Y     Z
                  X    Y    Z     Pad                     Pad    X    Y     Z
 & Coordinate                                                                                                                               Positional Info

 Example 1            XYZ YZP                                   PXY XYZ                        XYZ                               XYZ
 3x3 Conv2d           (=A) (=B)                                 (=C) (=A)
                                                                                                                                           Conv2d-Transpose
                                                                                                                                               Dilation
 Example 2             A           B                       C          A                        XYZ                               XYZ
 3x3 Conv2d-
 Transpose
                           AB     B                       C     CA                             XYZ                               XYZ        Positional Info
                                                                                                                                              Pathway
                                                                                                         Ignored   Ignored

                                                                                                                                              Consistent
 Image Space               AB     B                       C     CA                             XYZ                               XYZ
                                                                                                                                           Feature Pathway
                                          Inconsistent                                                      Consistent



Figure 3: Padding-free generator. (Left) Conventional generators synthesize inconsistent pix-
els due to the zero-paddings. Note that the inconsistency region grows exponentially as the net-
work deepened. (Right) In contrast, our padding-free generator can synthesize consistent pixel
value regardless of the position in the model receptive field. Such a property facilitates spatially-
independently generating patches and forming into a seamless image with consistent feature values.

the generator to memorize the padding pattern, and becomes vulnerable to unseen padding patterns
while attempting to synthesize at a different image size. The third column of Figure 4 shows when
we extend the input latent variable of the StyleGAN2 generator multiple times, the center part of the
features does not receive expected coordinate information from the paddings, resulting in extensively
repetitive textures in the center area of the output image. Second, zero-paddings can only provide
positional information within a limited distance from the image border. However, while generating
infinite-pixel images, the image border is considered infinitely far from the generated patch. Finally,
as shown in Figure 3, the existence of paddings hampers GT from generating separate patches that
can be composed together. Therefore, we remove all paddings from GT , facilitating the synthesis-
by-parts of arbitrary-sized images. We refer to the proposed GT as a padding-free generator (PFG).

3.4 S PATIALLY I NDEPENDENT G ENERATION
InfinityGAN enables spatially independent generation thanks to two characteristics of the proposed
modules. First, GS , as a neural implicit function, naturally supports independent inference at each
spatial location. Second, GT , as a fully convolutional generator with all paddings removed, can
synthesize consistent pixel values at the same spatial location in the implicit image, regardless of
different querying coordinates, as shown in Figure 3(b). With these properties, we can independently
query and synthesize a patch from the implicit image, seamlessly combine multiple patches into an
arbitrarily large image, and maintain constant memory usage while synthesizing images of any size.
In practice, having a single center pixel in a zS slice that aligns to the center pixel of the corre-
sponding output image patch can facilitate zl and c indexing. We achieve the goal by shrinking
the StyleGAN2 blur kernel size from 4 to 3, causing the model to generate odd-sized features in all
layers, due to the convolutional transpose layers.

3.5 M ODEL T RAINING
The discriminator D of InfinityGAN is similar to the one in the StyleGAN2 method. The detailed
architectures of G and D are presented in Appendix D. The two networks are trained with the non-
saturating logistic loss Ladv (Goodfellow et al., 2014), R1 regularization LR1 (Mescheder et al.,
2018) and path length regularization Lpath (Karras et al., 2020). Furthermore, to encourage the
generator to follow the conditional distribution in the vertical direction, we train G and D with an
auxiliary task (Odena et al., 2017) predicting the vertical position of the patch:
                                                                       Lar = kĉy − c̄y k1 ,                                                                  (5)
where ĉy is the vertical coordinate predicted by D, and c̄y is either (for generated images) cy =
tanh(iy ) or (for real images) the vertical position of the patch in the full image. We formulate Lar
as a regression task. The overall loss function for the InfinityGAN is:
                                  min Ladv + λar Lar + λR1 LR1 ,
                                   D                                                                                                                          (6)
                                  min − Ladv + λar Lar + λdiv Ldiv + λpath Lpath ,
                                   G
where λ’s are the weights.


                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




Table 1: Quantitative evaluation on Flickr-Landscape. Despite we use a disadvantageous setting
for our InfinityGAN (discussed in Section 4.1), it still outperforms all baselines after extending the
size to 4× larger. Furthermore, the user study shows an over 90% preference favors our Infinity-
GAN results. The preference is marked as x% when x% of selections prefer the results from the
corresponding method over InfinityGAN. † The images are first resized to 128 before resizing to 197.
                                                      Image Size       FID                ScaleInv FID             Preference v.s. Ours Inference
    Method
                                               Full    Train Test 8×   Train     1×     2×        4×       8×       4×          8×      Memory
    SinGAN                                     128     128     1024     4.21 4.21 57.10         145.12    210.22 0.80%       1.60%      O(size2 )
    COCO-GAN                                   128      32     1024    17.52 41.32 258.51       376.69    387.15   0%          0%        O(1)
    StyleGAN2+NCI                              128     128     1024     4.19  4.19  18.31        79.83    189.65 9.20%       7.20%      O(size2 )
    StyleGAN2+NCI (Patched)                    128      64     1024     5.35 21.06 58.84        165.65    234.19    -           -       O(size2 )
    StyleGAN2+NCI+PFG                          197†    101     1576    86.76 90.79 126.88       211.22    272.80 0.40%       1.20%       O(1)
    InfinityGAN (Ours)
                            197†                       101     1576    11.03 21.84     28.83     61.41    121.18     -          -        O(1)
    (StyleGAN2+NCI+PFG+GS )

                                    COCO-GAN            SinGAN                 StyleGAN+NCI       StyleGAN+NCI+PFG          InfinityGAN (ours)
                                    128×128            128×128                  128×128                  197×197                197×197
                    Full Image
Test-time extension Generated
  to 1024×1024




Figure 4: Qualitative comparison. We show that InfinityGAN can produce more favorable holistic
appearances against related methods while testing with an extended size 1024×1024. (NCI: Non-
Constant Input, PFG: Padding-Free Generator). More results are shown in Appendix E.
4                                E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Datasets. We evaluate the ability of synthesizing at extended image sizes on the Flickr-Landscape
dataset consists of 450,000 high-quality landscape images, which are crawled from the Landscape
group on Flickr. For the image outpainting experiments, we evaluate with other baseline meth-
ods on scenery-related subsets from the Place365 (Zhou et al., 2017) (62,500 images) and Flickr-
Scenery (Cheng et al., 2021) (54,710 images) datasets. Note that the Flickr-Scenery here is different
from our Flickr-Landscape. For image outpainting task, we split the data into 80%, 10%, 10% for
training, validation, and test. All quantitative and qualitative evaluations are conducted on test set.
Hyperparameters. We use λar = 1, λdiv = 1, λR1 = 10, and λpath = 2 for all datasets. All models
are trained with 101×101 patches cropped from 197×197 real images. Since our InfinityGAN
synthesizes odd-sized images, we choose 101 that maintains a sufficient resolution that humans can
still recognize its content. On the other hand, 197 is the next output resolution if stacking another
upsampling layer to InfinityGAN, which also provides 101×101 patches a sufficient field-of-view.
We adopt the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) optimizer with β1 = 0, β2 = 0.99 and a batch size 16
for 800,000 iterations. More details are presented in Appendix C.
Metrics. We first evaluate Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) at G training res-
olution. Then, without access to real images at larger sizes, we assume that the real landscape with
a larger FoV will share a certain level of self-similarity with its smaller FoV parts. We accordingly
propose a ScaleInv FID, which resizes larger images to the training data size with bilinear interpo-
lation, then computes FID. We denote N× ScaleInv FID when the metric is evaluated with images
N× larger than the training samples.
Evaluated Method. We perform the evaluation on Flickr-Landscape with the following algorithms:
− SinGAN. We train an individual SinGAN model for each image. The images at larger sizes
 are generated by setting spatially enlarged input latent variables. Note that we do not compare
 with the super-resolution setting from SinGAN since we focus on extending the learned structure
 rather than super-resolve the high-frequency details.


                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




− COCO-GAN. Follow the “Beyond-Boundary Generation” protocol of COCO-GAN, we transfer
 a trained COCO-GAN model to extended coordinates with a post-training procedure.
− StyleGAN2 (+NCI). We replace the constant input of the original StyleGAN2 with a zl of the
 same shape, we call such a replacement as “non-constant input (NCI)”. This modification enables
 StyleGAN2 to generate images at different output sizes with different zl sizes.

4.1   G ENERATION AT E XTENDED S IZE .
Additional (unfair) protocols for fairness. We adopt two additional pre- and post-processing to
ensure that InfinityGAN does not take advantage of its different training resolution. To ensure Infin-
ityGAN is trained with the same amount of information as other methods, images are first bilinear
interpolated into 128×128 before resized into 197×197. Next, for all testing sizes in Table 4, In-
finityGAN generates at 1.54× (=197/128) larger size to ensure final output images share the same
FoV with others. In fact, these corrections make the setting disadvantageous for InfinityGAN, as
it is trained with patches of 50% FoV, generates 54% larger images for all settings, and requires to
composite multiple patches for its 1× ScaleInv FID.
Quantitative analysis. For all the FID metrics in Table 1, unfortunately, the numbers are not directly
comparable, since InfinityGAN is trained with patches with smaller FoV and at a different resolution.
Nevertheless, the trend in ScaleInv FID is informative. It reflects the fact that the global structures
generated from the baselines drift far away from the real landscape as the testing FoV enlarges.
Meanwhile, InfinityGAN maintains a more steady slope, and surpasses the strongest baseline after
4× ScaleInv FID. Showing that InfinityGAN indeed performs favorably better than all baselines as
the testing size increases.
Qualitative results. In Figure 4, we show that all base-
lines fall short of creating reasonable global structures with
spatially expanded input latent variables. COCO-GAN is
unable to transfer to new coordinates when the extrapolated
coordinates are too far away from the training distribution.
Both SinGAN and StyleGAN2 implicitly establish image
features based on position encoded by zero padding, as-
suming the training and testing position encoding should be      Figure 5: LSUN bridge and tower.
the same. However, when synthesizing at extended image           InfinityGAN synthesize at 512×512
sizes, the inevitable change in the spatial size of the input    pixels. We provide more details and
and the features leads to drastically different position en-     samples in Appendix H.
coding in all model layers. Despite the models can still syn-
thesize reasonable contents near the image border, where                            Different local latent variables
the position encoding is still partially correct, they fail to
                                                                 Different styles




synthesize structurally sound content in the image center.
Such a result causes ScaleInv FID to rapidly surge as the ex-
tended generation size increases to 1024×1024. Note that
at the 16× setting, StyleGAN2 runs out of memory with a
batch size of 1 and does not generate any result. In com-
parison, InfinityGAN achieves reasonable global structures
with fine details. Note that the 1024×1024 image from
InfinityGAN is created by compositing 121 independently
synthesized patches. With the ability of generating consis-      Figure 6: Diversity. InfinityGAN
tent pixel values (Section 3.4), the composition is guaran-      synthesizes diverse samples at the
teed to be seamless. We provide more comparisons in Ap-          same coordinate with different local
pendix E, a larger set of generated samples in Appendix F,       latent and styles. More samples are
results from models trained at a higher resolution in Ap-        shown in Appendix I.
pendix G, and a very-long synthesis result in Appendix J.
In Figure 5, we further conduct experiments on LSUN bridge and tower datasets, demonstrating
InfinityGAN is applicable on other datasets. However, since the two datasets are object centric with
a low view-angle variation in the vertical direction, InfinityGAN frequently fills the top and bottom
area with blank padding textures.
In Figure 6, we switch different zl and GT styles (i.e., zg projected with the mapping layer) while
sharing the same c. More samples can be found in Appendix I. The results show that the structure


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




Figure 7: Spatial style fusion. We present a mechanism in fusing multiple styles together to increase
the interestingness and interactiveness of the generation results. The 512×4096 image fuses four
styles across 258 independently generated patches.
Table 2: Outpainting performance. The combi- Table 3: Inference speed up with parallel
nation of In&Out (Cheng et al., 2021) and Infin- batching. Benefit from the spatial independent
ityGAN achieves state-of-the-art IS (higher bet- generation nature, InfinityGAN achieves up to
ter) and FID (lower better) performance on image 7.20× inference speed up by with parallel batch-
outpainting task.                                  ing at 8192×8192 pixels. The complete table can
                        Place365    Flickr-Scenery be found in Appendix P.
  Method
                        FID    IS    FID    IS                     Parallel            Inference Time
                                                          Method                 # GPUs                    Speed Up
                                                                      Batch Size          (second / image)
  Boundless             35.02   6.15   61.98   6.98
  NS-outpaint           50.68   4.70   61.16   4.76       StyleGAN2     N/A        1          OOM             -
  In&Out                23.57   7.18   30.34   7.16                      1         1         137.44        ×1.00
  In&Out+ InfinityGAN    9.11   6.78   15.31   7.19       Ours          128        8          19.09        ×7.20


and texture are disentangled and modeled separately by GS and GT . The figure also shows that GS
can generate a diverse set of structures realized by different zl .
User study. We use two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) between InfinityGAN and other baselines
on the Flickr-Landscape dataset. A total of 50 participants with basic knowledge in computer vision
engage the study, and we conduct 30 queries for each participant. For each query, we show two
separate grids of 16 random samples from each of the comparing methods and ask the participant to
select “the one you think is more realistic and overall structurally plausible.” As presented in Table 1,
the user study shows an over 90% of preference favorable to InfinityGAN against all baselines.

4.2    A BLATION S TUDY: T HE P OSITIONAL I NFORMATION I N G ENERATOR
As discussed in Section 3.3, we hypothesize that StyleGAN2 highly relies on the positional in-
formation from the zero-paddings. In Table 1 and Figure 4, we perform an ablation by removing
all paddings from StyleGAN2+NCI, yielding StyleGAN2+NCI+PFG that has no positional infor-
mation in the generator. The results show that StyleGAN2+NCI+PFG fails to generate reasonable
image structures, and significantly degrades in all FID settings. Then, with the proposed GS , the
positional information is properly provided from zS , and resumes the generator performance back
to a reasonable state.

4.3    A PPLICATIONS
Spatial style fusion. Given a single global latent variable zg , the corresponding infinite-pixel image
is tied to a single modal of global structures and styles. To achieve greater image diversity and allow
the user to interactively generate images, we propose a spatial fusion mechanism that can spatially
combine two global latent variables with a smooth transition between them. First, we manually
define multiple style centers in the pixel space and then construct an initial fusion map by assigning
pixels to the nearest style center. The fusion map consists of one-hot vectors for each pixel, forming
a style assignment map. According to the style assignment map, we then propagate the styles in all
intermediate layers. Please refer to Appendix L for implementation details. Finally, with the fusion
maps annotated for every layer, we can apply the appropriate zg from each style center to each pixel
using feature modulation.Note that the whole procedure has a similar inference speed as the normal
synthesis. Figure 7 shows synthesized fusion samples.
Outpainting via GAN Inversion. We leverage the pipeline proposed in In&Out (Cheng et al.,
2021) to perform image outpainting with latent variable inversion. All loss functions follow the
ones proposed in In&Out. We first obtain inverted latent variables that generates an image similar
to the given real image via GAN inversion techniques, then outpaint the image by expanding zl and
zn with their unit Gaussian prior. See Appendix K for implementation details.
In Table 2, our model performs favorably against all baselines in image outpainting (Bound-
less (Teterwak et al., 2019), NS-outpaint (Yang et al., 2019), and In&Out (Cheng et al., 2021)).


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




         Boundless                              NS-outpaint




          In&Out                        In&Out + InfinityGAN



                                                                              Figure 9: Multi-modal outpainting. Infinity-
Figure 8: Outpainting long-range area. Infin-                                 GAN can natively achieve multi-modal outpaint-
ityGAN synthesizes continuous and more plau-                                  ing by sampling different local latents in the out-
sible outpainting results for arbitrarily large out-                          painted region. The real image annotated with
painting areas. The real image annotated with red                             red box is 256×128 pixels. We present more out-
box is 256×128 pixels.                                                        painting samples in Appendix M.
                                                    Arbitrary-Length Inbetweening




             Arbitrary-Length Cyclic Panorama                                           Arbitrary-Length Inbetweening

Figure 10: Image inbetweening with inverted latents. The InfinityGAN can synthesize arbitrary-
length cyclic panorama and inbetweened images by inverting a real image at different position. The
top-row image size is 256×2080 pixels. We present more samples in Appendix N and Appendix I.

As shown in Figure 8, while dealing with a large outpainting area (e.g., panorama), all previous
outpainting methods adopt a sequential process that generates a fixed region at each step. This intro-
duces obvious concatenation seams, and tends to produce repetitive contents and black regions after
the multiple steps. In contrast, with InfinityGAN as the image prior in the pipeline of (Cheng et al.,
2021), we can directly outpaint arbitrary-size target region from inputs of arbitrary shape. More-
over, in Figure 9, we show that our outpainting pipeline natively supports multi-modal outpainting
by sampling different local latent codes in the outpainting area.
Image inbetweening with inverted latent variables. We show another adaptation of outpainting
with model inversion by setting two sets of inverted latent variables at two different spatial locations,
then perform spatial style fusion between the variables. Please refer to Appendix K for implemen-
tation details. As shown in Figure 10, we can naturally inbetween (Lu et al., 2021) the area between
two images with arbitrary distance. A cyclic panorama of arbitrary width can also be naturally
generated by setting the same image on two sides.
Parallel batching. The nature of spatial-independent generation enables parallel inference on a
single image. As shown in Table 3, by stacking a batch of patches together, InfinityGAN can sig-
nificantly speed up inference at testing up to 7.20 times. Note that this speed-up is critical for
high-resolution image synthesis with a large number of FLOPs.

5    C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we propose and tackle the problem of synthesizing infinite-pixel images, and demon-
strate several applications of InfinityGAN, including image outpainting and inbetweening.
Our future work will focus on improving InfinityGAN in several aspects. First, our Flickr-Landscape
dataset consists of images taken at different FoVs and distances to the scenes. When InfinityGAN
composes landscapes of different scales together, synthesized images may contain artifacts. Second,
similar to the FoV problem, some images intentionally include tree leaves on top of the image
as a part of the photography composition. These greenish textures cause InfinityGAN sometimes
synthesizing trees or related elements in the sky region. Third, there is still a slight decrease in
FID score in comparison to StyleGAN2. This may be related to the convergence problem in video
synthesis (Tian et al., 2021), in which the generator achieves inferior performance if a preceding
network (e.g., the motion module in video synthesis) is jointly trained with the image module.


                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




6   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported in part by the NSF CAREER Grant #1149783 and a gift from Snap Inc.

7   E THICS S TATEMENT

Our work follows the General Ethical Principles listed at ICLR Code of Ethics (https://iclr.
cc/public/CodeOfEthics).
The research in generative modeling is frequently accompanied by concerns about the misuse of ma-
nipulating or hallucinating information for improper use. Despite none of the proposed techniques
aiming at improving manipulation of fine-grained image detail or hallucinating human activities, we
cannot rule out the potential of misusing the framework to recreate fake scenery images for any inap-
propriate application. However, as we do not drastically alter the plausibility of synthesis results in
the high-frequency domain, our research is still covered by continuing research in ethical generative
modeling and image forensics.

R EFERENCES
Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka. Image2stylegan++: How to edit the embedded
  images? In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020. 3

Yogesh Balaji, Mohammadmahdi Sajedi, Neha Mukund Kalibhat, Mucong Ding, Dominik Stöger,
  Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Soheil Feizi. Understanding over-parameterization in generative ad-
  versarial networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 1

Urs Bergmann, Nikolay Jetchev, and Roland Vollgraf. Learning texture manifolds with the periodic
  spatial gan. 2017.

Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic
  implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021. 3

Yinbo Chen, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. Learning continuous image representation with local
  implicit image function. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
  4

Yen-Chi Cheng, Chieh Hubert Lin, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Jian Ren, and Ming-Hsuan
  Yang. In&Out: Diverse image outpainting via gan inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00675,
  2021. 3, 6, 8, 9

Terrance DeVries, Miguel Angel Bautista, Nitish Srivastava, Graham W Taylor, and Joshua M
  Susskind. Unconstrained scene generation with locally conditioned radiance fields. In IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021. 3

Alexei A Efros and Thomas K Leung. Texture synthesis by non-parametric sampling. In IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 1999. 2

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021. 2

Anna Frühstück, Ibraheem Alhashim, and Peter Wonka. Tilegan: synthesis of large-scale non-
  homogeneous textures. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2019.

Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2014. 5

Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martı́n Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C. Courville. Im-
   proved training of wasserstein gans. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017. 1


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2017. 6

Tobias Hinz, Matthew Fisher, Oliver Wang, and Stefan Wermter. Improved techniques for training
  single-image gans. In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2021.

Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normal-
  ization. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017. 4

Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with con-
  ditional adversarial networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2017.

Nikolay Jetchev, Urs Bergmann, and Gokhan Yildirim. Copy the old or paint anew? an adversar-
  ial framework for (non-) parametric image stylization. Neural Information Processing Systems
  Workshops, 2018.

Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for im-
  proved quality, stability, and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. 1, 2

Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyz-
  ing and improving the image quality of stylegan. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2020. 2, 3, 4, 5

Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015. 6

Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Qi Mao, Jia-Bin Huang, Yu-Ding Lu, Maneesh Kumar Singh, and
  Ming-Hsuan Yang. Drit++: Diverse image-to-image translation viadisentangled representations.
  International Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 1–16, 2020. 4

Chieh Hubert Lin, Chia-Che Chang, Yu-Sheng Chen, Da-Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, and Hwann-Tzong
  Chen. COCO-GAN: Generation by parts via conditional coordinating. In IEEE International
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2019. 2

Andrew Liu, Richard Tucker, Varun Jampani, Ameesh Makadia, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo
  Kanazawa. Infinite nature: Perpetual view generation of natural scenes from a single image.
  In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021. 3

Guilin Liu, Fitsum A Reda, Kevin J Shih, Ting-Chun Wang, Andrew Tao, and Bryan Catanzaro.
  Image inpainting for irregular holes using partial convolutions. In European Conference on Com-
  puter Vision, 2018a. 3

Rosanne Liu, Joel Lehman, Piero Molino, Felipe Petroski Such, Eric Frank, Alex Sergeev, and Jason
  Yosinski. An intriguing failing of convolutional neural networks and the coordconv solution. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018b. 4

Chia-Ni Lu, Ya-Chu Chang, and Wei-Chen Chiu. Bridging the visual gap: Wide-range image blend-
  ing. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021. 9

Qi Mao, Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Siwei Ma, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Mode seeking gener-
  ative adversarial networks for diverse image synthesis. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2019. 4

Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Sebastian Nowozin. Which training methods for gans do
  actually converge? In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018. 1, 5

Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019. 3


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, 2020. 3
Kamyar Nazeri, Eric Ng, Tony Joseph, Faisal Qureshi, and Mehran Ebrahimi. Edgeconnect: Struc-
  ture guided image inpainting using edge prediction. In IEEE International Conference on Com-
  puter Vision Workshops, 2019. 3
Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative
 neural feature fields. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021. 3
Augustus Odena, Christopher Olah, and Jonathon Shlens. Conditional image synthesis with auxil-
  iary classifier GANs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017. 5
Aaron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016. 2
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
  Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In IEEE Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019. 3
Ali Razavi, Aaron van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images with
  VQ-VAE-2. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019. 2
Mark Sabini and Gili Rusak. Painting outside the box: Image outpainting with gans. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1808.08483, 2018. 3
Tamar Rott Shaham, Tali Dekel, and Tomer Michaeli. Singan: Learning a generative model from a
  single natural image. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019. 2
Assaf Shocher, Shai Bagon, Phillip Isola, and Michal Irani. Ingan: Capturing and retargeting the”
  dna” of a natural image. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019. 2
Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Im-
  plicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2020. 4
Ivan Skorokhodov, Grigorii Sotnikov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Aligning latent and image spaces
  to connect the unconnectable. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021. 2
Matthew Tancik, Pratul P Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan,
 Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan T Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let net-
 works learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. In Neural Information Pro-
 cessing Systems, 2020. 4
Piotr Teterwak, Aaron Sarna, Dilip Krishnan, Aaron Maschinot, David Belanger, Ce Liu, and
  William T Freeman. Boundless: Generative adversarial networks for image extension. In IEEE
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019. 8
Yu Tian, Jian Ren, Menglei Chai, Kyle Olszewski, Xi Peng, Dimitris N. Metaxas, and Sergey
  Tulyakov. A good image generator is what you need for high-resolution video synthesis. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 9
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017. 4
Jonas Wulff and Antonio Torralba. Improving inversion and generation diversity in stylegan using a
  gaussianized latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.06529, 2020.
Wenqi Xian, Patsorn Sangkloy, Varun Agrawal, Amit Raj, Jingwan Lu, Chen Fang, Fisher Yu,
 and James Hays. Texturegan: Controlling deep image synthesis with texture patches. In IEEE
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018. 2


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




Rui Xu, Xintao Wang, Kai Chen, Bolei Zhou, and Chen Change Loy. Positional encoding as spatial
  inductive bias in gans. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Zongxin Yang, Jian Dong, Ping Liu, Yi Yang, and Shuicheng Yan. Very long natural scenery image
  prediction by outpainting. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019. 3, 8
Jiahui Yu, Zhe Lin, Jimei Yang, Xiaohui Shen, Xin Lu, and Thomas S Huang. Free-form image
   inpainting with gated convolution. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
   3
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Bolei Zhou, Agata Lapedriza, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Places: A 10 mil-
  lion image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence, 2017. 6




                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2022




ArXiv latex compiler does not accept our supplementary.
Please find the full version of the paper on OpenReview with a better experience:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=ufGMqIM0a4b .




                                               14
