                                                Transformers, parallel computation, and logarithmic depth
                                                                Clayton Sanford1 , Daniel Hsu1 , and Matus Telgarsky2
                                                 1
                                                     Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
                                                           2
                                                             Courant Institute, New York University, New York, NY, USA
arXiv:2402.09268v1 [cs.LG] 14 Feb 2024




                                                                                       February 15, 2024

                                                                                             Abstract
                                                  We show that a constant number of self-attention layers can efficiently simulate—and be simulated
                                               by—a constant number of communication rounds of Massively Parallel Computation. As a consequence,
                                               we show that logarithmic depth is sufficient for transformers to solve basic computational tasks that
                                               cannot be efficiently solved by several other neural sequence models and sub-quadratic transformer
                                               approximations. We thus establish parallelism as a key distinguishing property of transformers.

                                         1     Introduction
                                         The transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has emerged as the dominant neural architecture for many sequential
                                         modeling tasks such as machine translation (Radford et al., 2019) and protein folding (Jumper et al., 2021).
                                         Reasons for the success of transformers include suitability to modern hardware and training stability: unlike
                                         in recurrent models, inference and training can be efficiently parallelized, and training is less vulnerable to
                                         vanishing and exploding gradients. However, the advantages of transformers over other neural architectures can
                                         be understood more fundamentally via the lens of representation, which regards neural nets as parameterized
                                         functions and asks what they can efficiently compute.
                                             Many previous theoretical studies of transformers establish (approximation-theoretic and computational)
                                         universality properties, but only at large model sizes (Yun et al., 2020; Pérez et al., 2021). These results
                                         are not unique to transformers and reveal little about which tasks can be solved in a size-efficient manner.
                                         Several other works (e.g., Hahn, 2020; Merrill and Sabharwal, 2022; Sanford et al., 2023) give fine-grained
                                         representational results in the scaling regime where context length grows but model depth is constant. In this
                                         regime, basic algorithmic tasks like matching parentheses and evaluating Boolean formulas are impossible.
                                             In this work, we identify parallelism as a key to distinguishing transformers from other architectures. While
                                         recurrent architectures process their inputs serially, transformers allow independent interactions between the
                                         input tokens, mediated by the inner products between query and key embeddings in self-attention units. We
                                         leverage this property of self-attention to establish a formal connection between transformers and Massively
                                         Parallel Computation (MPC) (Karloff et al., 2010). Concretely, we design transformers that simulate MPC
                                         protocols (and vice versa), and in doing so, we exhibit a wide range of computational tasks that are solved by
                                         logarithmic-depth transformers, including tasks that cannot be efficiently solved with other architectures
                                         such as graph neural nets and recurrent models.
                                         1.1    Our results
                                         We advance the understanding of transformers’ representational capabilities with the following results.
                                         1. The algorithmic capabilities and limitations of logarithmic-depth transformers are captured by the MPC
                                            model (Section 3).
                                         2. There is a simple sequential task that (i) is solved by (and, empirically, learned from data using) logarithmic-
                                            depth transformers, but (ii) cannot be efficiently solved by several alternative architectures (Sections 4
                                            and 5).


                                                                                                 1
    In more detail, our first collection of results, Theorems 3.1 and 3.4, show that any R-round MPC protocol
can be implemented by a transformer of depth O(R), and that any depth-L transformer can be simulated by an
O(L)-round MPC protocol. The former implies that several graph problems are solved by logarithmic-depth
transformers (Corollary 3.3); the latter implies the near-optimality of these transformers (Corollary 3.5)
conditional on a well-known conjecture about the limitations of MPC algorithms (Conjecture 2.4). A key
technical step (Lemma 3.2) shows how transformers can implement the simultaneous message-passing used in
MPC protocols to communicate between machines. While previous works (Sanford et al., 2023) have used
communication complexity to understand the representational limitations of self-attention layers, our results
show the benefits of the communication lens for understanding the strengths of transformers as well.
    Our second set of results concern the k-hop induction heads task, a synthetic sequential task that draws
inspiration from the induction heads primitive of Elhage et al. (2021). The theoretical results of Section 4 prove
that depth L = Θ(log k) is necessary and sufficient for efficient transformer representation. An accompanying
empirical investigation reveals that transformers trained on the task obey the same threshold and recover
a similar model to the theoretical construction. In contrast, Section 5 illustrates that non-parallelizable
recurrent architectures—including state-space models like Mamba (Gu and Dao, 2023)—are unable to solve
the task in a size-efficient manner. Moreover, well-known transformer models with computationally-efficient
alternatives to self-attention, like Performer (Choromanski et al., 2022) and Longformer (Beltagy et al.,
2020), and shallow transformers with chain-of-thought prompting sacrifice their abilities to implement parallel
algorithms, as evidenced by their proven inability to solve this task.
1.2    Related work
Some of the types of lower bounds we sought in this work were inspired by the literature on depth-separation
for feed-forward neural networks (e.g., Eldan and Shamir, 2016; Daniely, 2017; Telgarsky, 2016), which exhibit
functions that are efficiently approximated by deep networks, but not by shallower networks.
    Many theoretical approaches have been used to understand the representational capabilities of transformers
and self-attention units in various scaling regimes. Some works model (variants of) transformers as machines
for recognizing formal languages, such as the Dyck languages (Hahn, 2020; Bhattamishra et al., 2020; Yao
et al., 2021; Hao et al., 2022) and star-free regular languages (Angluin et al., 2023). These approaches reveal
inability of fixed-size transformers to handle arbitrarily long inputs. Other works show how transformers
can simulate finite-state automata Liu et al. (2022) with logarithmic depth, and Turing machines with
(unrolled) depth (or chain-of-thought length) scaling polynomially with total runtime Wei et al. (2021);
Malach (2023); Merrill and Sabharwal (2023b). However, it is unclear if these results are near optimal or
even transformer-specific.
    Theoretical results about the limitations of constant-depth transformers have been articulated by way of
analogy to circuit complexity (Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023a; Merrill et al., 2022; Merrill and Sabharwal, 2022;
Strobl, 2023; Strobl et al., 2023), implying the inability of constant-depth transformers to solve tasks like
graph connectivity and Boolean formula evaluation. Other works characterize the representational capabilities
of one-layer transformers (Likhosherstov et al., 2021; Sanford et al., 2023), but these approaches do not apply
to deeper models. Sanford et al. study multi-headed attention using communication complexity, a framing
that informs this work’s connection to distributed computing.
    The MPC model Karloff et al. (2010); Beame et al. (2017); Goodrich et al. (2011); Andoni et al. (2014);
Im et al. (2023) was introduced to study distributed computing frameworks such as MapReduce Dean and
Ghemawat (2004). A major goal is to design protocols that use few rounds of communication for setups
in which each machine’s local memory is sublinear in the input size. Many advances have been made in
MPC algorithms for important problems (see, e.g., Im et al., 2023, for a recent survey). However, a basic
problem that has resisted progress is connectivity in sparse graphs, where all MPC protocols in this memory
regime appear to require Ω(log n) rounds for input graphs on n vertices. Lower bounds in MPC and related
models were studied by Beame et al. (2017), Roughgarden et al. (2018), and Charikar et al. (2020). The
conjectured impossibility of o(log n)-round protocols for connectivity is now used as basis for conditional
lower bounds (Ghaffari et al., 2019).
    Simulation of transformers by recurrent models (Oren et al., 2024) and simulation of graph neural nets
(GNNs) by transformers (Kim et al., 2022) offer some coarse-grain insight into the relationship between these


                                                        2
architectures, but separations are not implied by these previous works. Our connection between transformers
and MPC is most similar to that established by Loukas (2019) between GNNs and the Congest model of
distributed computation. Both works establish positive and negative results by identifying neural architectures
with communication protocols. In Section 5.1, we show that the MPC connection allows transformers solve
graph connectivity more efficiently than GNNs.
    Our k-hop induction heads task is designed as a k-fold composition of its standard analogue (Elhage
et al., 2021). It is similar to a special case of the LEGO reasoning task Zhang et al. (2023), which reveals
the super-linear benefit of depth with respect to k; in our case, we theoretically and empirically exhibit an
exponential benefit. We also draw a connection to the well-studied problem of pointer-chasing (Papadimitriou
and Sipser, 1982; Duris et al., 1984; Nisan and Wigderson, 1993), which enables the proof of our separation
between parallel and serial architectures. Our fine-grained empirical interpretability analysis for synthetic
tasks draws inspiration from similar approaches for the analysis of sequential algorithms like sorting and
reversal (Li and McClelland, 2022).

2     Preliminaries
2.1    Transformers
We first define a self-attention head, the core primitive of a transformer. The softmax operator is softmax(v) =
                             PN
(exp(v1 ), . . . , exp(vN ))/ j=1 exp(vj ) for v ∈ RN . We apply softmax to matrices A ∈ RN ×N row-wise, i.e.
softmax(A)i = softmax((Ai,1 , . . . , Ai,N )).
Definition 2.1 (Self-attention head). A self-attention head is a mapping fQ,K,V : RN ×m → RN ×m defined
by
                                fQ,K,V (X) = softmax(Q(X)K(X)T )V (X)
and parameterized by row-wise query, key, and value embeddings Q, K, V : RN ×m → RN ×m (e.g., Q(X) =
(Q1 (X1 ), . . . , QN (XN )). Let AttnN
                                      m denote the set of all self-attention heads with embedding dimension m
and context length N .
  A transformer composes L layers of H self-attention heads per layer, plus an output multi-layer perceptron
(MLP).
Definition 2.2 (Transformer). A transformer is a mapping T : RN ×din → RN ×dout specified by self-attention
heads (fℓ,h ∈ AttnL
                  m )ℓ∈[L],h∈[H] and an element-wise output MLP ψ = (ψ1 , . . . , ψN ) : R
                                                                                           N ×m
                                                                                                → RN ×dout .
Upon input X ∈ R   N ×din
                          , the transformer computes intermediate embeddings X , . . . , X ∈ RN ×m with
                                                                                   0        L

X = X and
  0
                                                     XH
                                       X ℓ = X ℓ−1 +     fℓ,h (X ℓ−1 ),
                                                   h=1
and returns T (X) = ψ(X ) as output. Let TransformerN
                          L
                                                    m,L,H,din ,dout denote the set of all such transformers,
and TransformerN
               m,L,H := Transformer N
                                    m,L,H,1,1 .
Modeling assumptions. We treat the transformer as a computational model that permits arbitrary
element-wise computation, but restricts the manner in which multiple elements are processed together.
This manifests in our decisions to model query/key/value embeddings and MLPs as arbitrary functions
on the embedding space; Loukas (2019) employs a similar modeling assumption for GNNs. Note that the
element-wise embeddings and MLPs may be index-specific, obviating the need for positional embeddings.
    Our theoretical results cover the scaling regime where the context length N is the main asymptotic
parameter; while the embedding dimension m, the number of heads H, and the depth L grow sub-linearly in
N . This reflects real-world trends in large-language models, where context length has sharply increased in
recent years.
    Throughout, we assume all intermediate computations in transformers are represented by p-bit precision
numbers for p = Θ(log N ). Limiting the precision is consistent with recent practice of using low-precision
arithmetic with transformers (e.g., Wang et al., 2022; Dettmers et al., 2022). We discuss this precision
assumption in greater detail in Appendix A.1, along with other minor technical assumptions (such as the
inclusion of a “start token” for mathematical convenience).


                                                       3
 • Input = (Input1 , . . . , Inputnin ) ∈ Zn                                                            nin
                                           2p is distributed across local memories of machines 1 ≤ i ≤ ⌈ s ⌉:
                                             in



                                                 (1)
                                 MachineIni            = {(Inputι , ι) : ι ∈ {(s−1)i+1, . . . , min {nin , si}}}.

 • For round r = 1, . . . , R:
                                                                   (r)                                               (r)
    – Each machine i computes messages (MsgOuti,j )j=1,2,... to send to machines (Desti,j )j=1,2,... as function of
                (r)
       MachineIni :
                                 (r)                                (r)                  (r)       (r)     d
                  MachineOuti          = Localr,i (MachineIni ) = {(MsgOuti,j , Desti,j ) ∈ Z2pj × [q] : j = 1, 2, . . . };
                                       X
                                              dj ≤ s is ensured.
                                          j


    – All messages are simultaneously transmitted; the messages in local memory of machine i for round r + 1 are:
                                                       (r+1)                                               (r)
                                        MachineIni             = {(Msg, Src) : (Msg, i) ∈ MachineOutSrc };
                                                               X
                                                                                     (r+1)
                                                                                             |Msg| ≤ s is ensured.
                                                                  (Msg,Src)∈MachineIni


 • Output = f (Input) comes from
                                           (R+1)
                            MachineIni             = {(Outputι , Src) : ι ∈ {(s − 1)i+1, . . . , min {nout , si}}}

    for 1 ≤ i ≤ ⌈ nout
                   s
                       ⌉.


Figure 1: Formal execution of an MPC protocol for computing f : Zn2pin → Zn2pout . (|Msg| is the number of
words in Msg.)


Masked transformers. We also consider masked self-attention, where only certain inner products influence
                                      N ×N
the softmax output. Let Λ ∈ {−∞, 0}          be a masking matrix with at least one zero entry in every row.
Then, a Λ-masked self-attention unit is defined by
                                         Λ
                                        fQ,K,V (X) = softmax(Q(X)K(X)T + Λ)V (X).

Let Λ-AttnN m and Λ-Transformerm,L,H , respectively, denote the sets of all Λ-masked self-attention heads and
                                N

all transformers comprised of those heads. We define causally-masked transformers by MaskAttnN  m := Γ-Attnm
                                                                                                            N

and MaskTransformerm,L,H := Γ-Transformerm,L,H , where Γ is the lower-triangular mask with Γi,j = 0 iff
                     N                       N

i ≥ j.
2.2     Massively Parallel Computation model
We use the definition of MPC from Andoni et al. (2018).
Definition 2.3 (MPC protocol). For any global and local memory constants γ, δ > 0, a (γ, δ)-MPC protocol
for a function f : Zn2pin → Zn2pout specifies a distributed computing protocol for q = Θ(n1+γ−δ in    ) machines,
each with s = O(nδin ) words1 of local memory to jointly compute f (Input) for any given Input ∈ Zn2pin as
follows. The Input ∈ Zn2pin is distributed across the local memories of the first ⌈nin /s⌉ machines. Computation
proceeds in rounds. In each round, each machine computes an arbitrary function of its local memory to
prepare at most s words to send to other machines; messages are simultaneously transmitted, and the protocol
ensures that each machine receives at most s words at the end of the round. After the final round, the
Output = f (Input) ∈ Zn2pout is in the local memories of the first ⌈nout /s⌉ machines. See Figure 1 for details.
   Our negative results in Section 3.2 are conditional on the well-known “one-versus-two cycle” conjecture
(Beame et al., 2017; Roughgarden et al., 2018; Ghaffari et al., 2019).
   1We assume the word size is p = Θ(log n ) bits. For convenience, we regard words as elements of Z p (integers mod 2p ).
                                          in                                                        2



                                                                          4
Conjecture 2.4 (see, e.g., Ghaffari et al., 2019). For any γ > 0, δ < 1, and N , if π is an (γ, δ)-MPC
protocol that distinguishes a single cycle on N nodes and a union of two cycles each on N/2 nodes, then π
uses Ω(log N ) rounds.

2.3     Graphs as sequential inputs
When providing a graph G = (V, E) as input to transformers or MPC protocols, we serialize G as a sequence
in [|V |]2|E| that encodes each edge as a pair of vertex tokens. The resulting transformer has N = 2|E| and
din = 1, and the resulting MPC protocol has nin = 2|E|.

3     Relating transformers and MPC
We coarsely characterize the computational power of transformers in a certain size regime by establishing a
bidirectional relationship between transformers and MPC. Theorems 3.1 and 3.4 show that any MPC protocol
can be simulated by a transformer, and vice versa. As corollaries (Corollaries 3.3 and 3.5), we obtain tight
upper and lower bounds on the depth of bounded-size transformers for computing connected components in
graphs.
3.1     Simulation of MPC protocols by transformers
The following theorem shows that any MPC protocol π with sublinear local memory can be simulated by
a transformer whose depth L is linear in the number of rounds R of π, and embedding dimension m is
polynomial in the local memory size s = O(N δ ) of machines used by π.
Theorem 3.1. For constants 0 < γ < δ < 1 and any deterministic R-round (γ, δ)-MPC protocol π
on nin input words and nout ≤ nin output words, there exists a transformer T ∈ TransformerN       m,L,H with
N = nin , m = O(n4δ
                  in log n in ), L = R + 1, H = O(log log n in ) such that T (Input) :nout = π(Input) for all
Input ∈ ZN2 p .

   The theorem provides a non-trivial construction in the strongly sub-linear local memory regime when
                                                                                       ′
s = O(N 1/4−ϵ ) for any ϵ > 0.2 Whether the simulation can be improved to m = O(N 1−ϵ ) for some ϵ′ > 0
whenever s = O(N   1−ϵ
                       ) is an interesting question for future work.
Theorem 3.1 proof overview. At a high level, the proof in Appendix B.2 entails simulating each round
of parallel computation with a single-layer transformer and applying those constructions serially to Input.
                                                                      (r)                      (r)
The local computation on each machine (represented by MachineOuti = Localr,i (MachineIni )) is directly
encoded using element-wise query/key/value embeddings.
    The crux of the proof involves the simulation of a routing protocol to determine MachineIn(r+1) from
MachineOut(r) . We construct a self-attention unit that ensures that an encoding of a sequence of addressed
messages from each machine are properly routed to their destinations.3
    For any message size β, message count bound s, and number of tokens N , we say that (Sent, Rcvd) ∈
RN ×m × RN ×m is a valid (β, s)-routing if, for each i ∈ [N ], the i-th row of Sent (resp. Rcvd) is the vector
encoding of some Senti ⊂ Zβ2p × [N ] (resp. Rcvdi ⊂ Zβ2p × [N ]) such that

                                       Rcvdi = {(Msg, Src) : (Msg, i) ∈ SentSrc } ,

and each of Rcvdi and Senti has cardinality at most s.4

Lemma 3.2. For any β, s, N ∈ N, there exists a transformer routeβ,s ∈ TransformerN          m,1,1 with m =
O(s4 β log N ) satisfying routeβ,s (Sent) = Rcvd for any valid (β, s)-routing (Sent, Rcvd).
   2 Applying Theorem 3.1 when δ ≥ 1 yields transformers with embedding dimension m ≥ N , which trivializes the transformer
                                     4
architecture and negates any advantages of depth under our MLP universality assumption. This is due to the fact a transformer
with N -dimensional embeddings could aggregate the entire input sequence X ∈ RN in a single embedding and use its output
MLP to compute any arbitrary function on that input.
   3 This routing between machines uses the all-pairs structure of self-attention and may not admit a subquadratic approximation.
   4We abuse notation by writing Dest ∈ Sent to mean there exists some Msg such that (Msg, Dest) ∈ Sent .
                                                i                                                             i




                                                               5
    The proof of Lemma 3.2 appears in Appendix B.1 and combines two key techniques: sparse propagation
and multiple hashing. The former is a simple variant of the “sparse averaging” task of Sanford et al. (2023),
which simultaneously computes N averages over subsets of inputs; this task is solved a single self-attention
head with small embedding dimension (Proposition B.1). Using sparse propagation, we construct a self-
attention head that averages the ≤ s encodings of each RcvdSrc for every Src ∈ Rcvdi . In order to ensure that
we can decode that average of encodings, we apply error-correction by encoding each Outputi in a sparse and
redundant manner, where each outgoing messages appears as multiple copies of the same addressed “packet.”
Application: connectivity with log-depth transformers. As an immediate consequence of Theorem 3.1,
any graph problem solvable with a logarithmic number of rounds of MPC computation (and local memory s)
is also computable by a logarithmic depth transformer (and embedding dimension Õ(s4 )). The following
result—which bounds transformer depth needed to compute connected components of a graph G—follows
from Theorem 6.2 of Coy and Czumaj (2022), which derandomizes an MPC algorithm of Behnezhad et al.
(2019), and Theorem 3.1.
Corollary 3.3. For any constant ϵ ∈ (0, 1) and any D ≤ N , there exists a transformer in TransformerNm,L,H
with m = O(N ϵ ), H = O(log log N ), and L = O(log D) that identifies the connected components of any input
graph G = (V, E) with |V |, |E| = O(N ) where each connected component has diameter at most D.
   Coy and Czumaj also give efficient MPC algorithms for other related problems (e.g., spanning forest), so
we obtain efficient transformers for these problems, too (Appendix B.3).
3.2     Simulation of transformers by MPC protocols
The following theorem shows that MPC protocols can simulate transformers and prove depth lower bounds
on transformers, conditioned on Conjecture 2.4. We get, as a corollary, the conditional optimality of the
transformer depth bound in Corollary 3.3.
Theorem 3.4. For any transformer T ∈ TransformerN            m,L,H (or Λ-Transformerm,L,H ) with mH = O(N ) for
                                                                                          N                       δ

δ ∈ (0, 1) and any δ ′ ∈ (δ, 1), there exists a O( δ′L−δ )-round (1 + δ ′ , δ ′ )-MPC protocol with q = O(N 2 ) machines
                ′
with s = O(N δ ) local memory for computing T .
    Theorem 3.4 demonstrates that the algorithmic capabilities of transformers are no stronger than those of
MPC protocols with a quadratic scaling in the number of machines. While Theorems 3.1 and 3.4 do not
jointly provide a sharp characterization of the two computational models, the reductions are tight enough to
provide strong evidence for the optimality of the connected components construction of Corollary 3.3.
Theorem 3.4 proof overview. At a high-level, the proof constructs an MPC protocol that simulates
a self-attention layer by separating the computation of MLPs and attention matrices into three separate
categories of machines.
• Each input token is provided to its own token machine, responsible for preparing the query/key/value
   embeddings.
• Each pair of tokens is associated with an inner product machine that will compute the inner product
  between their respective query and key embeddings.
• Propagation machines ensure that embeddings are routed to the proper inner product machine and compute
   outputs of each softmax unit.
The proof gives the communication protocol for these machines, shows how they simulate a layer of self-
                                                                                                  ′
attention in O(1/(δ ′ − δ)) rounds, and establishes the sufficiency of O(N 2 ) machines with O(N δ ) local
memory.
Application: conditional optimality of Corollary 3.3. Assuming the well-established Conjecture 2.4,
we prove an Ω(log D) lower bound on the depth of parameter-efficient transformers for determining connectivity
of graphs where connected components may have diameter up to D.
Corollary 3.5. Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1) be any constant, and let D ≥ N ϵ . Assume Conjecture 2.4, and suppose there
exists T ∈ TransformerN
                      m,L,H with mH = O(D
                                            1−ϵ
                                                ) that decides connectivity of any input graph with connected
components having diameter ≤ D. Then L = Ω(log D).


                                                           6
4     Transformers for k-hop induction heads
We complement the generality of Section 3 by studying, both empirically and theoretically, a specific toy
sequential modeling task which will also serve (in Section 5) as a problem to separate the representational
capabilities of transformers from that of other neural architectures.
    This task, called the k-hop induction heads task, draws inspiration from the original induction heads task
defined and analyzed on trained language models and in synthetic environments by Elhage et al. (2021) (see
also Bietti et al., 2023). The standard induction heads task completes bigrams auto-regressively by predicting
the token that follows the last previous occurrence of the final token in the sequence. For example, given the
input X = baebcabebdea, the standard induction heads task is to complete the final bigram by predicting b
for the final token.
    The k-hop induction heads tasks generalizes this mechanism by repeatedly using the completion of a
bigram to determine the next bigram to complete. In the previous example, the 2-hop induction heads task
is to predict c for the final token:
                                                baebcabebdea.

Definition 4.1. For any finite alphabet Σ, define the map hopk : ΣN → (Σ ∪ {⊥})N by hopk (X)i = Xfindk (i)
                                                                                                                    X

if findkX (i) ̸= 0 and ⊥ otherwise, where

                               find1X (i) = max({0} ∪ {j ∈ N : j ≤ i, Xj−1 = Xi });
                               findkX (i) = find1X (findk−1
                                                        X (i))    for k ≥ 2.

The k-hop induction heads task is to compute, for each i = 1, . . . , N , the value of hopk (X)i from (X1 , . . . , Xi ).

   We note a similarity to the LEGO tasks of Zhang et al. (2023), who empirically study the ability of
transformers to learn sequential operations on Abelian groups and observe the ability to perform more
operations than the depth of the network.
4.1    Log-depth transformer for k-hop induction heads
Although hopk appears to requires k steps to solve, we show that it is solved by a transformer of depth
O(log k).
Theorem 4.2. For any k ∈ N and alphabet Σ with |Σ| ≤ N , there exists T ∈ MaskTransformerN
                                                                                         m,L,H that
computes hopk : ΣN → (Σ ∪ {⊥})N with m = O(1), L = ⌊log2 k⌋ + 2, and H = 1.

   In contrast to Corollary 3.3, this construction has constant embedding dimension and is achieved by a
causally-masked transformer. As such, its proof in Appendix D.1 depends on other techniques that exploit
the simplicity of the problem and build on the induction heads construction of Bietti et al. (2023), rather
than simply applying Theorem 3.1.
   We give evidence for the optimality of this construction by proving a conditional lower bound using
Theorem 3.4, as was done in Corollary 3.5.

Corollary 4.3. Assuming Conjecture 2.4, for any constants ξ ∈ (0, 1/2] and ϵ ∈ (0, 1), and any even
k = Θ(N ξ ), every transformer T ∈ MaskTransformerN
                                                  m,L,H with mH = O(k
                                                                      1−ϵ
                                                                          ) that computes hopk has depth
L = Ω(log k).

4.2    Log-depth transformer learned from data
We empirically assess whether the representational trade-offs elucidated by tasks efficiently solved by
parallelizable algorithms have implications for optimization and generalization properties of transformers. To
that end, we trained auto-regressive transformer architectures of varying sizes to solve hopk (X) for a variety
of values of k in order to understand how changing depth impacted the performance of the learned models,
the goal being to verify the sufficiency of logarithmic depth, just as in our theory.


                                                           7
                                L-layer transformer token-wise classification error on hopk
                              0.7       L=2
                                        L=3
                              0.6       L=4
                                        L=5
                              0.5       L=6
                              0.4
                      Error
                              0.3
                              0.2
                              0.1
                              0.0
                                    1           2             4          8            16
                                                              k

Figure 2: Evaluation of transformers of depths L ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6} trained on a mixture of hopk for k ∈
{0, . . . , 16} evaluated on n = 100 samples of size N = 100 from each hopk . Incrementing depth approximately
doubles the largest k such that hopk is learnable with small error.


    In brief, we trained transformers with 500K to 5M parameters and depths {2, 3, 4, 5, 6} with Adam
to solve hopk (X) for k ∈ {0, . . . , 16} with context length |N | = 100 and alphabet size |Σ| = 4. We
trained the transformers in a multi-task setting, where a single model was trained to predict the sequence
hopk (X) auto-regressively when provided with X and k drawn at random. Further experimental details
can be found in Appendix G.1, and the experimental code is available at https://github.com/chsanford/
hop-induction-heads.
    We found that transformers are indeed capable of learning hopk given sufficient training time, and that the
largest learnable k grows exponentially with the depth. As can be seen in Figure 2, a six-layer neural network
performs well on all k ≤ 16, a five-layer on k ≤ 8, a four-layer on k ≤ 4, and so forth. We further explore
these experimental results in Appendix G.2 and observe a performance threshold appears to specifically lie at
⌊log2 k⌋ + 2 that coincides with Theorem 4.2. This logarithmic dependence of the depth on k persists in a
larger-width regime, which is explored in Appendix G.3. In the finite sample regime where neural networks
are prone to overfit, our investigations in Appendix G.5 note improved generalization in deeper models, which
suggests that deeper models have a favorable inductive bias for tasks like hopk .
    Moreover, the learned models are surprisingly interpretable. We examined the activation patterns of
attention matrices, and found close correspondences to useful intermediate products such as findjX . Taken
together, these indicate that the learned models mechanistically resemble the construction employed in the
proof of Theorem 4.2. See Appendix G.4 for our investigation of model interpretability.

5    Separations between transformers and alternative architectures
Sections 3 and 4 characterize the representational capability of transformers by providing algorithmic problems
they can solve with logarithmic depth and small polynomial or constant width. In contrast, other well-known
architectures are unable to solve those same problems in a parameter-efficient manner. This section provides
lower bounds on the parameter complexity of graph neural networks (GNNs), recurrent neural architectures,
transformers with computationally efficient alternatives to softmax self-attention, and single-layer transformers
with autoregressive chain-of-thought tokens needed to solve graph connectivity and the k-hop task.




                                                          8
5.1     GNNs need polynomial depth for graph connectivity
The bidirectional relationship between transformers and MPC draws inspiration from past work drawing a
similar connection between message passing graph neural networks (GNNmp ) and the Congest distributed
computing model Loukas (2019). Their computation model of GNNmp for width m and depth L closely
resembles our TransformerNm,L,H in providing a general framework for the analysis of graph neural networks
by allowing unbounded computation in each vertex with bounded communication on edges. On some input
graph G, vertices send neighbors messages of size at most m—which are aggregated and crafted into new
messages with MLPs—over L rounds of communication.
    By restating Corollary 4.2 of Loukas (2019), we demonstrate a sharp contrast in the abilities of GNNs
and transformers to solve graph algorithmic tasks.
Theorem 5.1 (Corollary 4.2 of Loukas (2019)). There exists a graph G with N edges such that any GNNmp
with width m and depth L that √determines whether an input subgraph H either (1) is connected or (2) forms
a spanning tree of G requires L m = Ω̃(N 1/4 ).
   While Corollaries 3.3 and B.8 demonstrate the ability of transformers to determine whether any input
graph is connected5 or to identify a spanning tree with logarithmic depth and small polynomial width (i.e.
m = O(N ϵ )), GNNs require depth L = Ω̃(N 1/4−ϵ/2 ) in the same regime. This gap is explainable by the fact
that transformers on graph inputs G are not bound to pass messages exclusively along the edges of G. By
“rewiring” the graphical structure in each layer, transformers can perform aggregation and “pointer passing”
tasks with greater parametric ease than GNNs.
5.2     Suboptimality of recurrent architectures for hopk
The logarithmic-depth and constant-width transformer implementation of hopk in Theorem 4.2 cannot be
replicated by recurrent neural architectures (Chung et al., 2014; Bengio et al., 1994; Turkoglu et al., 2021),
including not just multi-layer recurrent neural networks (RNNs) but any sequential prediction procedure
equivalent to them at inference time, which includes state space models such as Mamba (Gu and Dao, 2023).
    We first consider a family of multi-layer RNNs of depth L and width m, consisting of arbitrary MLP units
gℓ : Rm×m → Rm×m , which on input X ∈ RN ×din produce output Y ∈ RN ×dout as follows using intermediates
X = Z 0 , Z 1 , . . . , Z L−1 , Z L = Y ∈ RN ×m6 and hidden states H 1 , . . . , H L ∈ {0, 1}N ×m with H0ℓ = ⃗0:
                                     (Ziℓ , Hiℓ ) = gℓ (Ziℓ−1 , Hi−1
                                                                 ℓ
                                                                     ), ∀i ∈ [N ], ℓ ∈ [L].
We provide a polynomial bound on the width and depth of a multi-layer RNN solving hopk .
Corollary 5.2. A multi-layer RNN of depth L and width m as above with YN = hopk (X)N satisfies either
L ≥ k or m = Ω( kN6 ).
    In contrast to Theorem 4.2, which demonstrates that depth O(log k) transformers with constant width
suffice to solve hopk for any k, Corollary 5.2 demonstrates that all multi-layer RNNs with width O(N 1/7 )
require depth k when k = O(N 1/7 ).
    Mamba (Gu and Dao, 2023) can be seen as the combination of three ideas: (1) a continuous-time
dynamics model of sequential prediction, powerful enough to model Kalman filters, hidden markov models,
and many others; (2) a family of time-discretization schemes; (3) an unrolling technique to enable efficient
linear-time training, using ideas similar to FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022). Ultimately, at inference time,
the time-discretization step results in an RNN (see Gu and Dao, 2023, Algorithm 2 and Theorem 1), and is
therefore directly handled by Corollary 5.2.
    This corollary is a near immediate application of a communication complexity fact about the hardness
of solving multi-player pointer-chasing problems with limited communication among players (Guha and
McGregor, 2009; Assadi and N, 2021). We provide the communication model and this result in Appendix E.1,
and the reductions necessary to prove the above hardness results in Appendix E.2.
   5While the problem of subgraph connectivity for GNNs may at first glance appear more difficult than general graph connectivity

for transformers, an implementation of this exact task can be implemented by modifying the protocol Corollary 3.3 to remove all
edges from the graph that do not belong to H.
   6We assume that d , d
                       in out ≤ m and treat X and Y as if they are padded with zeros.



                                                               9
5.3    Suboptimality of sub-quadratic attention transformers for hopk
Due to the quadratic computational cost of computing the attention matrix softmax(Q(X)K(X)T ) ∈ RN ×N
and the continued desire for ever-larger context lengths, there is substantial interest in improving the
computational complexity of the transformer architecture while preserving its expressive capabilities and
inductive biases. As a result, a rich literature has emerged that proposes computationally-efficient alternatives
to standard softmax attention. In this section, we demonstrate how several representative examples of
sub-quadratic attention mechanisms lose the ability to perform efficient parallel computation under a
logarithmic-depth scaling.
Kernel-based sub-quadratic attention. One approach to computationally-efficient approximation of
transformers are kernel-based sub-quadratic attention mechanisms such as Performer (Choromanski et al., 2022),
and Poly-Sketchformer (Kacham et al., 2023). Both approximate the attention matrix softmax(Q(X)K(X)T )
                                                                   ′
with a low-rank matrix Q′ (X)K ′ (X)T where Q′ , K ′ : Rm → Rm are applied element-wise. For sufficiently
                                                                                                         ′
small m ≪ N , Q (X)K (X) V (X) can be computed efficiently by first computing K ′ (X)T V (X) ∈ Rm ×m ,
        ′         ′      ′    T

bounding the total runtime as O(N mm ), rather than O(N m).
                                          ′                   2

   Let KernelFormerN m,m′ ,L,H denote all H-headed L-layer transformer whose softmax attention modules are
replaced by kernel-based sub-quadratic attention. We demonstrate the limitations of KernelFormerN   m,m′ ,L,H
by showing that, unlike TransformerN m,L,H  , they have no depth-efficient implementation of hopk .

Corollary 5.3. Any T ∈ KernelFormerN
                                   m,m′ ,L,H with T (X)N = hopk (X)N satisfies either L ≥ k or mm Hp =
                                                                                                 ′

Ω( k6 ).
   N


    Under a parameter-efficient regime where mpHL = O(N ϵ ), solving hopk for k = Θ(N ϵ ) necessitates
kernel feature dimension m′ = Ω(N 1−9ϵ ), which forces each attention unit to compute an N × N 1−9ϵ matrix,
yielding a nearly quadratic runtime. We prove Corollary 5.3 in Appendix E.3 using a similar pointer chasing
reduction.
Masking-based sub-quadratic attention. Another method that reduces the computational cost of
transformers is to used masked models of Λ-TransformerN        m,L,H for a sparse mask Λ. The Longformer
architecture (Beltagy et al., 2020) introduces a particular masked architecture that combines sliding windows
with sparse unmasked global tokens. Put concretely, for window radius w and global frequency g, let
                N ×N
Λw,g ∈ {−∞, 0}        be masking matrix with
                                       (
                                 w,g     0     if |i − j| ≤ w or j ≡ 0 (mod g),
                               Λi,j =
                                         −∞ otherwise.

Then, the output of a single unit of Λw,g -masked attention is computable in time O((w + Ng )N m).

Corollary 5.4. Any T ∈ Λw,g -AttnN
                                 m,L,H with T (X)N = hopk (X)N satisfies either L ≥ k or (w + gk )mHp =
                                                                                              N

Ω( k6 ).
   N


    Like kernel-based attention, sparsely-masked attention models fail to efficiently compute hopk . Similarly,
in the same parameter-efficient regime, a Longformer must have either w = Ω(N 1−9ϵ ) or g = O(N 9ϵ ), which
jointly ensures that the masked matrix has at least Ω(N 2−9ϵ ) entries and diminishes any computational
advantages. This proof also appears in Appendix E.3.
5.4    Limitations of 1-layer transformers with chain-of-thought
While most of the paper considers transformers as sequence-to-sequence models, we can also frame them as
auto-regressive models performing next-token-prediction with chain-of-thought prompting. In this regime, a
single causally-masked transformer aims to compute a function of its input by repeatedly predicting the next
token, appending previously predicted tokens to the end of the input. In doing so, a function is computable if
there exists an intermediate chain-of-thought produced by the model that eventually reaches the answer.


                                                       10
Definition 5.5. We say that T ∈ MaskTransformerN         +NCoT
                                                       m,L,H   computes f : ΣN +NCoT → ΣN , where the
additional N tokens denote chain-of-thought, if for every X ∈ dom(f ), there exists XCoT ∈ ΣNCoT such that
T (X ◦ XCoT )N :N +NCoT = (XCoT ◦ f (X)).
    The theoretical capabilities of chain-of-thought augmented transformers to simulate finite-state automata
and Turing machines have been studied (Malach, 2023; Merrill and Sabharwal, 2023b), but the comparative
capabilities of shallow models with chain-of-thought prompting and deep sequential models are unknown. In
contrast to the fact that any transformer with NCoT tokens can be simulated by a sequential model with
depth scaled by NCoT , we show that deep transformers cannot necessarily be efficiently simulated by shallow
chain-of-thought models. We do so by demonstrating that a linear amount of chain-of-thought prompting in
k is necessary to solve hopk (X)N , and also sufficient.
Corollary 5.6. Any T ∈ MaskTransformerN   +NCoT
                                        m,1,H      that computes hopk (X)N with NCoT tokens of chain-of-
thought requires either NCoT ≥ k or mHp = Ω( k6 ).
                                             N


   The proof appears in Appendix E.4. For future work, it remains to consider the comparative powers of
chain-of-thought models of depths greater than one.

6    Conclusion and future work
This work highlights parallelism as a central feature of transformers that sets them apart from other neural
architectures. The focus on the log-depth and sublinear-width regime and specific computational tasks allows
us to accentuate the benefits of parallelism, even for tasks like k-hop that appear inherently serial at first
glance.
    There is some efficiency loss in the “compilation” of MPC protocols to transformers that we hope to
understand better in future work. Furthermore, although we have empirically demonstrated the learnability
of transformers that exploit parallelism in crucial ways, a theoretical understanding of learning such solutions
remains an open question.

References
Alekh Agarwal, Olivier Chapelle, Miroslav Dudík, and John Langford. A reliable effective terascale linear
  learning system. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):1111–1133, 2014.
Alexandr Andoni, Aleksandar Nikolov, Krzysztof Onak, and Grigory Yaroslavtsev. Parallel algorithms
  for geometric graph problems. In Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
  computing, pages 574–583, 2014.
Alexandr Andoni, Zhao Song, Clifford Stein, Zhengyu Wang, and Peilin Zhong. Parallel graph connectivity in
  log diameter rounds. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS).
  IEEE, October 2018. doi: 10.1109/focs.2018.00070. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2018.00070.
Dana Angluin, David Chiang, and Andy Yang. Masked hard-attention transformers and boolean rasp
 recognize exactly the star-free languages, 2023.
Sepehr Assadi and Vishvajeet N. Graph streaming lower bounds for parameter estimation and property
  testing via a streaming xor lemma. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium
  on Theory of Computing, STOC ’21. ACM, June 2021. doi: 10.1145/3406325.3451110. URL http:
  //dx.doi.org/10.1145/3406325.3451110.
Paul Beame, Paraschos Koutris, and Dan Suciu. Communication steps for parallel query processing. Journal
  of the ACM (JACM), 64(6):1–58, 2017.
Soheil Behnezhad, Sebastian Brandt, Mahsa Derakhshan, Manuela Fischer, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi,
  Richard M Karp, and Jara Uitto. Massively parallel computation of matching and mis in sparse graphs. In
  Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 481–490, 2019.


                                                      11
Iz Beltagy, Matthew E. Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The long-document transformer, 2020.
Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is difficult.
  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(2):157–166, 1994. doi: 10.1109/72.279181.
Satwik Bhattamishra, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. On the ability and limitations of transformers to
  recognize formal languages. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, 2020.
Alberto Bietti, Vivien Cabannes, Diane Bouchacourt, Herve Jegou, and Leon Bottou. Birth of a transformer:
  A memory viewpoint, 2023.
Moses Charikar, Weiyun Ma, and Li-Yang Tan. New lower bounds for massively parallel computation from
 query complexity, 2020.
Krzysztof Choromanski, Valerii Likhosherstov, David Dohan, Xingyou Song, Andreea Gane, Tamas Sarlos,
  Peter Hawkins, Jared Davis, Afroz Mohiuddin, Lukasz Kaiser, David Belanger, Lucy Colwell, and Adrian
 Weller. Rethinking attention with performers, 2022.

Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of gated
  recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
Kevin Clark, Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, and Christopher D Manning. What does bert look at? an
 analysis of bert’s attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04341, 2019.
Sam Coy and Artur Czumaj. Deterministic massively parallel connectivity. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
  ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2022, page 162–175, New York, NY, USA,
  2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450392648. doi: 10.1145/3519935.3520055. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/3519935.3520055.
Amit Daniely. Depth separation for neural networks. In Satyen Kale and Ohad Shamir, editors, Proceedings
 of the 2017 Conference on Learning Theory, volume 65 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
 690–696. PMLR, 07–10 Jul 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v65/daniely17a.html.
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Flashattention: Fast and memory-
  efficient exact attention with io-awareness. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. Mapreduce: Simplified data processing on large clusters. In OSDI,
  pages 137–150, 2004.

Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Llm.int8(): 8-bit matrix multiplication
  for transformers at scale. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, 2022.
Pavol Duris, Zvi Galil, and Georg Schnitger. Lower bounds on communication complexity. In Proceedings of
  the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, page 81–91, 1984.

Ronen Eldan and Ohad Shamir. The power of depth for feedforward neural networks. In Vitaly Feldman,
 Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad Shamir, editors, 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, volume 49 of
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 907–940, Columbia University, New York, New York,
 USA, 23–26 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v49/eldan16.html.
Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell,
 Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds,
  Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown,
  Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer
  circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.



                                                   12
Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, and Jara Uitto. Conditional hardness results for massively parallel computation
 from distributed lower bounds. In IEEE 60th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
 pages 1650–1663, 11 2019. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2019.00097.
Michael T Goodrich, Nodari Sitchinava, and Qin Zhang. Sorting, searching, and simulation in the mapreduce
 framework. In International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation, pages 374–383. Springer, 2011.
Albert Gu and Tri Dao. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces, 2023.
Sudipto Guha and Andrew McGregor. Stream order and order statistics: Quantile estimation in random-
  order streams. SIAM Journal on Computing, 38(5):2044–2059, 2009. doi: 10.1137/07069328X. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1137/07069328X.
Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Trans. Assoc. Comput.
 Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl\_{a}{\_{0}{0}{3}}{0}6. URL https://doi.org/10.
 1162/tacl_a_00306.
Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention transformers:
  Perspectives from circuit complexity. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 10:800–810, 2022. URL https:
  //transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl/article/view/3765.
Sungjin Im, Ravi Kumar, Silvio Lattanzi, Benjamin Moseley, Sergei Vassilvitskii, et al. Massively parallel
  computation: Algorithms and applications. Foundations and Trends® in Optimization, 5(4):340–417, 2023.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn
  Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure
  prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.
Praneeth Kacham, Vahab Mirrokni, and Peilin Zhong. Polysketchformer: Fast transformers via sketches for
  polynomial kernels, 2023.
Howard Karloff, Siddharth Suri, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. A model of computation for mapreduce. In
 Twenty-first Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 938–948, 12 2010. doi: 10.1137/
 1.9781611973075.76.
Jinwoo Kim, Tien Dat Nguyen, Seonwoo Min, Sungjun Cho, Moontae Lee, Honglak Lee, and Seunghoon
  Hong. Pure transformers are powerful graph learners, 2022.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2014.
Yuxuan Li and James L. McClelland. Systematic generalization and emergent structures in transformers
  trained on structured tasks, 2022.
Valerii Likhosherstov, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Adrian Weller. On the expressive power of self-attention
  matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03764, 2021.
Bingbin Liu, Jordan T. Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Cyril Zhang. Transformers learn
  shortcuts to automata, 2022.
Andreas Loukas. What graph neural networks cannot learn: depth vs width. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.03199,
 2019.
Eran Malach. Auto-regressive next-token predictors are universal learners, 2023.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. A logic for expressing log-precision transformers, 2022.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The parallelism tradeoff: Limitations of log-precision transformers.
 Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 11:531–545, 2023a. ISSN 2307-387X. doi:
 10.1162/tacl_a_00562. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00562.


                                                     13
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. The expressive power of transformers with chain of thought, 2023b.
William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A. Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-depth threshold
 circuits. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10:843–856, 2022. ISSN 2307-387X.
 doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00493. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00493.

MPICH. Mpi allreduce, 2023. URL https://www.mpich.org/static/docs/latest/www3/MPI_Allreduce.
 html.
Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Rounds in communication complexity revisited. SIAM Journal on Computing,
 22(1):211–219, 1993. doi: 10.1137/0222016. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/0222016.
Matanel Oren, Michael Hassid, Yossi Adi, and Roy Schwartz. Transformers are multi-state rnns, 2024.

Christos H. Papadimitriou and Michael Sipser. Communication complexity. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
 Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, page 196–200, 1982.
Jorge Pérez, Pablo Barceló, and Javier Marinkovic. Attention is turing complete. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(1):3463–3497, 2021.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models
  are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. A primer in bertology: What we know about how bert
 works. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:842–866, 2021.

Tim Roughgarden, Sergei Vassilvitskii, and Joshua Wang. Shuffles and circuits (on lower bounds for modern
  parallel computation). Journal of the ACM, 65:1–24, 11 2018. doi: 10.1145/3232536.
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu, and Matus Telgarsky. Representational strengths and limitations of transformers,
  2023.
Lena Strobl. Average-hard attention transformers are constant-depth uniform threshold circuits, 2023.

Lena Strobl, William Merrill, Gail Weiss, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. Transformers as recognizers of
  formal languages: A survey on expressivity, 2023.
Matus Telgarsky. Benefits of depth in neural networks. In Vitaly Feldman, Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad
 Shamir, editors, 29th Annual Conference on Learning Theory, volume 49 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pages 1517–1539, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA, 23–26 Jun 2016. PMLR.
 URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v49/telgarsky16.html.
Mehmet Ozgur Turkoglu, Stefano D’Aronco, Jan Dirk Wegner, and Konrad Schindler. Gating revisited: Deep
 multi-layer rnns that can be trained. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44
 (8):4081–4092, 2021.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30,
  2017.
Ziwei Wang, Changyuan Wang, Xiuwei Xu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Quantformer: Learning extremely
  low-precision vision transformers. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.

Colin Wei, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Statistically meaningful approximation: a case study on approxi-
  mating turing machines with transformers, 2021.




                                                     14
Shunyu Yao, Binghui Peng, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Karthik Narasimhan. Self-attention networks can
  process bounded hierarchical languages. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
  2021.
Chulhee Yun, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Are transformers
  universal approximators of sequence-to-sequence functions? In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2020.
Yi Zhang, Arturs Backurs, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Suriya Gunasekar, and Tal Wagner. Unveiling
  transformers with lego: a synthetic reasoning task, 2023.




                                                   15
A     Supplemental Preliminaries
A.1     Further details about transformers
We discuss a few minor technicalities and modifications of the self-attention unit (Definition 2.1) and
transformer model (Definition 2.2) defined in Section 2.1 that are necessary for readers looking for a
comprehensive understanding of the proofs of our theoretical results.
Fixed-bit precision arithmetic. As discussed in Section 2.1, we assume that all numbers that appear in
the intermediate products and outputs of self-attentions are representable with p-bit precision arithmetic,
where p = Θ(log N ). While the details of fixed-precision arithmetic will be uninteresting to most readers, it
is necessary to explain precisely what we mean in order to ensure that proofs of results like Theorem 3.4 are
sound. Throughout the paper, we allow p to depend on of constants, such as γ, δ, and ϵ.
    Concretely, we assume that all query, key, and value embeddings Q(X), K(X), V (X) evaluated on all
inputs contain scalar values z ∈ R that are polynomially bounded (i.e. |z| ≤ exp(O(p)) = N ζ for sufficiently
large constant exponent ζ > 0) and are inverse-polynomially discretized (i.e. z · N ζ ∈ Z). Depending on the
desired exponent ζ, some p = Θ(log N ) can be chosen to guarantee this property. While we do not formally
analyze the precision needed to approximate the particular embeddings employed by our proofs, we note
that our recurring sinusoidal embeddings (e.g. Lemma D.1) can be discretized without losing their central
properties and that discretizations of the restricted isometry embeddings of Proposition B.1 are analyzed by
Sanford et al. (2023).
    Rather than stipulating a particular bounded-precision implementation that computes the output of a self-
attention unit must be implemented, we specify a rounding constraint that any computational implementation
of a self-attention unit must satisfy. Precisely, we require that any output round to the same inverse-polynomial
discretization as the true mathematical attention.
Definition A.1. For a self-attention unit f ∈ AttnN       ˆ
                                                  m , let f be an finite-precision implementation of that unit.
            ˆ
We say that f is a valid implementation if
                                                                      1
                                                                     
                                    sup     f (X) − fˆ(X)     =O           .
                                  X∈RN ×m                   ∞         2p
   This definition is only to establishing the fact that self-attention units with sufficient margins can precisely
compute hardmax outputs in Lemma A.2 and to showing that MPC models can indeed compute the outputs
precisely in Theorem 3.4.
Hardmax attention. While we exclusively consider attention units with the softmax, our constructions
periodically rely on the exact computation of averages of embeddings. We define the hardmax operator to
allow the consideration of discrete averaging operations. For some v ∈ RN , let
                                                 (
                                                       1
                                                           , if i ∈ Imax (v)
                                 hardmax(X)i = |Imax (v)|
                                                   0          otherwise,

where Imax (v) = {i ∈ [N ] : vi = maxi′ vi′ }.
   We show that bounded-precision softmax self-attention units that satisfy a margin property can be
modified slightly to have identical outputs to an analogous hardmax unit.
Lemma A.2. Let f ∈ AttnN   m be a self-attention unit with precision p = Θ(log N ) and embedding functions
Q, K, V such that for some fixed 1 ≥ ξ = N −O(1) and every X ∈ RN ×m and i ∈ [N ]:
                               A(X)i,i′ ≤ max
                                           ′′
                                              A(X)i,i′′ − ξ, ∀i′ ̸∈ Imax (A(X)i ),
                                            i

where A(X) = Q(X)K(X)T . Then there exists a self-attention unit f ′ ∈ AttnN
                                                                           m with a valid p -bit implemen-
                                                                                           ′

tation with p = O(p) satisfying
             ′

                                 f ′ (X) = hardmax(A(X))V (X).
    The proof of Lemma A.2 is provided in Appendix F.


                                                        16
Start tokens. Our technical proofs are occasionally simplified by including a “dummy token” whose value
is passed in self-attention layers as a default or null value. For example, in the proof of Lemma D.2, the
dummy token handles the case where the reference token does not appear previously in the sequence. While
we believe that this extra token is not necessary for our technical arguments, we include it for the sake of
simplicity.
    We model this dummy token as a start-of-sequence token X0 . Concretely, if we employ X0 in a self-
attention f ∈ AttnN    m which takes as input X, we instead treat f as an attention unit in Attnm
                                                                                                N +1
                                                                                                     that operates
on (X0 , X1 , . . . , XN ). We assume that X0 is constant-valued, and therefore never both to pay attention to its
outputs; it’s only relevance is via its key and value embeddings K0 (X0 ), V0 (X0 ) ∈ Rm . If X0 is unmentioned,
we assume that it does not exist, or is set such that its key embedding inner products are all zero.
Supplemental chain-of-thought tokens. We periodically (see Theorem B.3 and the proofs of Corollar-
ies 3.5 and 4.3) consider transformers with supplemental blank “chain-of-thought” tokens appended to the
end of the sequence. Unlike the start token, these are only constant at initialization and may be used deeper
in the model to perform meaningful computations.
    Let TransformerN,M
                   m,L,H,din ,dout denote transformers with M − N extra blank elements appended to the input
sequence. Concretely, we represent T ∈ TransformerN,M  m,L,H,din ,dout as some T ∈ Transformerm,L,H,din ,dout and
                                                                                 ′            M

define the output T (X) for X ∈ R    N ×din
                                            by letting Y ∈ R M ×din
                                                                      for Y1:N = X and YN +1:M = ⃗0, and letting
T (X) = T ′ (Y ).

B      Proofs from Section 3.1
B.1     Proof of Lemma 3.2
Lemma 3.2. For any β, s, N ∈ N, there exists a transformer routeβ,s ∈ TransformerN          m,1,1 with m =
O(s4 β log N ) satisfying routeβ,s (Sent) = Rcvd for any valid (β, s)-routing (Sent, Rcvd).
      The proof relies on a sparse propagation sequential primitive, which complements the sparse averaging
primitive of Sanford et al. (2023). For any Q ≤ d, N , on input X = (X1 , . . . , XN ) ∈ RN ×d with Xi =
(zi , Si ) ∈ Rd−Q × [N ]Q and bi = |{Sj ∋ i : j ∈ [N ]}| ≤ Q, we define
                                                           ( P
                                                             1
                                                                      zj if bi > 0,
                              sparsePropagateQ,d (X)i = bi Sj ∋i
                                                            0            otherwise.

Closely following the argument of Sanford et al. (2023), we show in Proposition B.1 that there is a self-
attention unit with embedding dimension m = max(d, O(q log N )) that computes sparsePropagateQ,d . This
construction is a key component of the single-layer transformer used in the proof of Lemma 3.2.
Proposition B.1. For any b ≤ N and d, there exists a self-attention unit sparsePropagateQ,d ∈ AttnN   m,p for
                                                                                                      m−Q−d
m = d+O(Q log N ) and p = O(log N ), which, given any input X with Xi = (zi , Si , 0) ∈ R × ≤Q ×{0}
                                                                                   ⃗           [N ]
                                                                                          d
                                                                                                    

such that bi = |{Sj ∋ i : j ∈ [N ]}| ≤ Q for all i, has output sparsePropagateQ,d (X) satisfying

                                                                     1 X
                                       sparsePropagateQ,d (X)i =         zj .
                                                                     bi
                                                                       Sj ∋i

    The proof of Proposition B.1 appears in Appendix F.
Proof of Lemma 3.2. We construct a single-layer single-headed transformer with query, key, and value
embeddings Q, K, V and output MLP ψ. Q, K, V can be decomposed as Q = Q′ ◦ ϕ, K = K ′ ◦ ϕ, V = V ′ ◦ ϕ,
for some input MLP ϕ and embeddings Q′ , K ′ , V ′ . We fix Q′ , K ′ , V ′ to be the respective embeddings of the self-
attention unit with embedding dimension m from Proposition B.1 that computes Y = sparsePropagates,m (X)
for XSrc = (zSrc , SSrc ) for every Src ∈ [N ] to be determined. Hence, the proof entails designing element-
wise encoders ϕ = (ϕ1 , . . . , ϕN ) and decoders ψ = (ψ1 , . . . , ψN ) that compute Rcvd from Sent, using


                                                          17
                             ϕ                                 sparsePropagate                                    ψ
             Sent                          (z, S)                                             Y                                Rcvd




                         Machine 1           Y1 =S1(0,
                                                    =2)(0, 2)                                             Machine 0
                                            z1
                                 α̃   Sg
                                       rc        Dest
                                                  g      Mg
                                                          sg
                                 1     1           0     hey
             Sent1
                                 0
        Dest     Msg
                         ϕ       1     1            2     yo
         0       hey                                                                                      Machine 2
                                 0
         2          yo
                                 1     1            0    hey                     2Y2 = 2 · sparsePropagate((z, S))2
                                 0                                                       = z1 + z3
                                 1     1            2     yo                      2ᾱ         2Src 2Dest 2Msg
                                                                                  1             1    0   hey
                                                                                  1               3   2     yes                Rcvd2
                                                                                  2                         asd           Src      Msg
                                                                                                                      ψ
                         Machine 3                  S3 = (2, 4)                   1               3   4     no             0          yo
                                            z3                                    2                         wyz            2       yes
                                 α̃   Sg
                                       rc        Dest
                                                  g      Mg
                                                          sg                      0
                                 0                                                1               1   2     yo
             Sent3
                                 1     3            2    yes
        Dest     Msg
                         ϕ       1     3            2    yes
         2       yes
                                 1     3            4     no
         4          no
                                 1     3            4     no                                              Machine 4
                                 0
                                 0



Figure 3: A visualization of the construction used to prove Lemma 3.2 in three phases—the encoding of
each input SentSrc as embedding zSrc and subset SSrc with ϕ; the combination of those embeddings into
YDest via the simulation of sparsePropagates,m ((z, S)); and the decoding of each YDest into output RcvdDest
with ψ. The figure provides an example of the encoding and decoding where machines 1 and 3 transmit
messages to machine 2. “Multiple hashing” is used to compute z1 and z3 by encoding each message in multiple
fixed-location “packets” in embedding space space. This redundancy ensures the possibility of machine 2
decoding Rcvd2 from Y2 , due to each message occurring alone at least once in the encoding.


sparsePropagates,m as an intermediate step. A high-level overview of the proof construction is visualized in
Figure 3.
    On input SentSrc , we use the encodings QSrc , KSrc , VSrc to specify that all tokens Dest with Dest ∈ SentSrc
(or equivalently, all Dest with Src ∈ RcvdDest ) should receive a copy of the encoding of SentSrc . That is, we
set SSrc := {Dest ∈ SentSrc } for each Src ∈ [N ]. This ensures that Y satisfies
                                                                   1           X
                                                  YDest =                                    zSrc .
                                                               |RcvdDest | Src∈Rcvd
                                                                                      Dest


    While it’s tempting to simply set each zSrc ∈ Rm equal to a (βs)-dimensional vectorization of SentSrc , it
is unclear how to extract RcvdDest from each YDest , since each average performed by sparsePropagates,m will
combine multiple vector embeddings in a shared space. In order to avoid these troubles, we employ a multiple
hasing-based encoding that treats messages as “packets” identified by a message, a source, a destination, and
a “validity token” that can be used to determine whether a message is uncorrupted. We include multiple


                                                                        18
copies of each packet in the encoding zSrc . For notational ease, we represent each zSrc ∈ Rm as a collection of
packets                                                                                                ′
               zSrc = (Mg
                        sgSrc,j , Sg         ] Src,j , αSrc,j )j∈[m′ ] ∈ (Zβ2p × [N ] × [N ] × {0, 1})m ,
                                   rcSrc,j , Dest
where m = m′ (3 + β).
   To sparsely and redundantly encode each SentSrc as zSrc , we encode outgoing messages as packets
by utilizing the matrix A guaranteed by the following fact (which we use with n := N 2 , b := s2 , and
m′ := d = O(s4 log N )).
Fact B.2. For any n, b ≤ n, and d ≥ 12b2 ln n , there exists a binary matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×d such that, for
                                                     

every subset S ⊆ [n] with|S| ≤ b, the columns of the sub-matrix AS ∈ {0, 1}|S|×d contains all S-dimensional
elementary vectors, i.e., e1 , . . . , e|S| is a subset of the columns of AS .
   The proof of Fact B.2 is at the end of the section. We use the following rule to determine which (if any)
message to encode as a packet at each Src ∈ [N ] and j ∈ [m′ ]. We let A(Src,Dest),j = AN (Src−1)+Dest,j for
notational convenience.
                     
                     (Msg, Src, Dest, 1) if (Msg, Dest) ∈ SentSrc and A(Src,Dest),j = 1
                     
            zSrc,j =                         and A(Src,Dest′ ),j = 0, ∀ Dest′ ∈ SentSrc \ {Dest} ,
                       (0, 0, 0, 0)        otherwise.
                     ⃗
                     

In Figure 3, this encoding is visualized in the tables of “Machine 1” and “Machine 3,” where the entirety of
each message is encoded in two fixed and distinct locations in the embeddings z1 and z3 , alongside metadata
about the source of message and the validity α̃. Each message is encoded as multiple identical packets in
different embedding dimensions and a large fraction of embedding locations are left blank. These features are
critical for the proper evaluation of the decoding step ψ.
    We analyze the Y = sparsePropagateβ,m (X) outputs, letting
                                                                                            ′
                       YDest = (YDest,1 , . . . , YDest,m′ ),    YDest,j ∈ (Rβ × R × R × R)m ,

with all numbers represented with p-bit fixed precision. This analysis shows that there exists an element-wise
decoder MLP ψ satisfying ψDest (YDest ) = RcvdDest for all Dest ∈ [N ]. For any j ∈ [m′ ], observe from the
definition of zSrc and sparsePropagates,m that

                      YDest,j =: MsgDest,j , SrcDest,j , DestDest,j , ᾱDest,j
                                                                               

                                    1           X                                               
                              =                             sgSrc,j , Sg
                                                           Mg          rcSrc,j , Dest
                                                                                 ] Src,j , αSrc,j .
                                |RcvdDest | Src∈Rcvd
                                                       Dest


Before formally analyzing this construction, we motivate its utility with Figure 3. The encoding 2Y2 of
Machine 2 contains four “clean” rows j with 2ᾱ2,j = 1, two “corrupted” rows with 2ᾱ2,j = 2, and one “blank”
row with 2ᾱ2,j = 0.
  • The blank row contains no information about any incoming messages, since neither Machine 1 nor
    Machine 3 encoded messages as packets in these locations. The fact that 2ᾱ2,j = 0 certifies the blankness
    of this row, and hence, the decoder ψ can ignore it.
  • The corrupted rows correspond to locations where both Machine 1 and Machine 3 saved messages as
    packets. As a result, the corresponding embedding Y2,j = 12 (z1,j + z3,j ) is an average of two non-zero
    embeddings and is hence “corrupted.” Because 2ᾱ2,j = 2, the decoder ψ detects the corruption and
    ignores it when computing Rcvd2 .
  • The clean rows are locations where exactly one of Machine 1 and Machine 3 encoded a message. Hence,
    these messages can be cleanly understood by the decoder ψ, which simply validates the “cleanliness” of
    the row with 2ᾱ2,j = 1, determines whether Machine 2 is indeed the target recipient of the respective
    message, and saves all such messages in the decoding Rcvd2 .


                                                                19
   We prove the validity of this intuition by ensuring that the encoding scheme successfully encodes each
incoming message in a clean row and that the category of each row (blank, corrupted, or clean) can be
detected by the decoder ψ. We observe the following sequence of facts about every YDest . Let

                RelevantDest := {(Msg, Src′ , Dest′ ) : Src′ ∈ RcvdDest , (Msg, Dest′ ) ∈ SentSrc′ }

denote the set of all messages sent by sources of messages sent to Dest.
   1. Consider any outgoing message (Msg, Src′ , Dest′ ) ∈ RelevantDest . By the property of A guaranteed by
      Fact B.2, there exists some j such that A(Src′ ,Dest′ ),j = 1 and A(Src′′ ,Dest′′ ),j = 0 for every (Src′′ , Dest′′ ) ∈
      RelevantDest \ {(Src′ , Dest′ )} . As a result of the definition of the encoding z and the averaged
      representation of YDest :
                                                       1
                                       YDest,j =                (Msg, Src′ , Dest′ , 1) .                                 (1)
                                                 |RcvdDest |

   2. Conversely, if ᾱDest,j = 1/|RcvdDest |, then there exists a unique (Msg, Src′ , Dest′ ) ∈ RelevantDest such
      that (1) is satisfied.
   3. If at least one message is received, then the minimal nonzero value of ᾱDest is 1/|RcvdDest |.
   We design ψDest to uniquely identify RcvdDest from YDest as follows. If at least one message is received,
then 1/|RcvdDest | can be identified by finding the smallest nonzero value of ᾱDest . The decoder ψ inspects
every YDest,j satisfying ᾱDest,j = 1/|RcvdDest |, which therefore satisfies

                            |RcvdDest | · (MsgDest,j , SrcDest,j , DestDest,j ) ∈ RelevantDest .

Thus, if |RcvdDest | · DestDest,j = Dest, then |RcvdDest | · (MsgDest,j , SrcDest,j ) ∈ RcvdDest , and ψ encodes it as
such.


Fact B.2. For any n, b ≤ n, and d ≥ 12b2 ln n , there exists a binary matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×d such that, for
                                                     

every subset S ⊆ [n] with|S| ≤ b, the columns of the sub-matrix AS ∈ {0, 1}|S|×d contains all S-dimensional
elementary vectors, i.e., e1 , . . . , e|S| is a subset of the columns of AS .
Proof. Let col(A) denote the set of columns of A. We use the probabilistic method and consider A with iid
entries Ai,j ∼ Bernoulli( b+1
                           1
                              ). We bound the probability of failure:

                      [n]
                                                         
             Pr ∃S ∈      s.t. e1 , . . . , e|S| ̸⊂ col(AS ) ≤ b · nb Pr [ei ̸∈ col(AS )]
                              
                      ≤b
                                                                                                 b !d
                                                                               1             1
                                                                                      
                                                              ≤n b+1
                                                                        1−          · 1−
                                                                             b+1            b+1
                                                                                       d
                                                                                 1
                                                                     
                                                              ≤ nb+1 1 −
                                                                             e(b + 1)
                                                                                         
                                                                                     d
                                                              ≤ nb+1 · exp −
                                                                                e(b + 1)
                                                                                               
                                                                                           d
                                                              < exp (b + 1) ln n −                ≤ 1.
                                                                                       3(b + 1)

Therefore, there exists a matrix A with the claimed property.




                                                            20
                                                     K(·)⊤


                                                                                V (·)


                                             Sparse propagation


                                Q(·)
                                                                              Multiple
                                                  Local                       hashing



                                                                               Local
                                                          Softmax attention


                                                                          Attention head
                                                                           Attention head
                                                                             Attention head




Figure 4: To simulate MPC, the local computation within each machine is pushed inside Q(·), K(·), V (·), and
then the pairwise attention matrix performs message routing. To ensure proper routing and also that the
outputs of Q(·), K(·), V (·) are all tall-and-skinny matrices, the construction carefully utilizes both multiple
hashing and sparse propagation.


B.2     Proof of Theorem 3.1
We give a generalization of Theorem 3.1 that simulates a broader family of MPC protocol, including those
with more than n machines (i.e. γ ≥ δ). We accommodate this generalization by simulating MPC protocols
with the generalized transformer family TransformerN,M
                                                   m,L,H detailed in Appendix A with supplemental blank
“chain-of-thought” tokens.
Theorem B.3 (Generalization of Theorem 3.1). For constant γ, δ > 0 and any potentially randomized
R-round (γ, δ)-MPC protocol π on nin input words and nout ≤ nin output words, there exists a transformer T ∈
TransformerN,M                                    1+γ−δ
           m,L,H with N = nin , M = max(nin , O(nin     )), m = O(n4δ
                                                                   in log nin ), L = R + 1, H = O(log log nin )
such that
                                        T (Input):nout = π(Input).
    Theorem 3.1 is an immediate consequence of Theorem B.3 by noting that M = N for sufficiently large
nin when γ < δ. Its central construction is summarized in Figure 4.

Proof. Consider any MPC protocol π with q = O(n1+γ−δ    in         ) machines and s = O(nδin ) local memory
that, following the notation of Definition 2.3, maps Input ∈ Zn2pin to Output ∈ Zn2pout with interme-
diates MachineIn(1) , . . . MachineIn(R) and MachineOut(1) , . . . , MachineOut(R) and deterministic functions
(Localr,i )r∈[R],i∈[q] with
                                               (r)                               (r)
                                   MachineOuti       = Localr,i (MachineIni ).
   To simulate the protocol, we let every machine i ∈ [q] correspond to a particular position in the transformer’s
context. A transformer that simulates π can then be constructed that consolidates Input onto ⌈nin /s⌉ machines
to match MachineIn(1) ; computes MachineIn(r+1) from MachineIn(r) for each r = 1, . . . , R − 1; and computes
and properly distributes Output from MachineIn(r) . These three elements of the construction exist due to
the following lemmas, which are proved later.


                                                          21
Lemma B.4. For any MPC protocol π with local memory s and q machines with nin -word inputs, there
                                       nin ,max(nin ,q)
exists a transformer init ∈ Transformers,1,1,d in ,dout
                                                        with din = 1 and dout = s, which, given Input ∈ Zn2p , has
output satisfying init(Input) = MachineIn(1) .

Lemma B.5. For any R-round MPC protocol π with local memory s and q machines and any r ∈ [R − 1],
there exists a transformer round(r) ∈ Transformerqm,1,H,din ,dout with H = O(log log q), m = O(s4 log q), and
din = dout = s which, given any valid input X = MachineIn(r) ∈ Zq×m  2p  under the MPC protocol in vectorized
form, has output satisfying round(r) (X) = MachineIn(r+1) .

Lemma B.6. For any R-round MPC protocol π with local memory s and q machines with nout -word output,
                                              q,max(n ,q)
there exists a transformer final ∈ Transformers,1,1,din out
                                                        ,dout for din = s and dout = 1, which, given input
X = MachineIn , has output final(X) with final(X)i,1 = Outputi ∈ Z2p .
                (R)


   The proof immediate from the three lemmas. We construct the final transformer T by stacking the
single-layer constructions as a single transformer with embedding dimension m:

                                 T = final ◦ round(R−1) ◦ · · · ◦ round(1) ◦ init.

   The proofs of Lemmas B.4 and B.6 rely on simple constructions with fixed attention matrices and appear
in Appendix F. The proof of Lemma B.5 relies on Lemma 3.2 and is proved in the following section.

Proof of round(r) construction. To prove the existence single-layer transformer that simulates round(r) ,
we separate the computational task into two steps: (i) obtaining MachineOut(r) from MachineIn(r) and
(ii) obtaining MachineIn(r+1) from MachineOut(r) . Because the former requires no communication between
machines, we can encode that conversion in the input MLP to the transformer.
     The nontrivial part of the reduction is thus the latter step, which we obtain by utilizing multiple single-
headed attention units routeβ,s of Lemma 3.2 to route messages of different sizes to their recipients. The
difficulty in this task is the mismatch in functionality between the two computational models: while the MPC
model ensures that each recipient automatically receives its intended messages, transformers must implement
this functionality manually, while ensuring that multiple messages do not overwrite one another.
     The following lemma implements that routing functionality for all messages, using different attention
heads depending on the size of the message. We prove Lemma B.5 at the end of the section as a simple
modification of Lemma B.7.

Lemma B.7. For any R-round MPC protocol π with local memory s and q machines and any r ∈ [R − 1],
there exists a transformer route(r) ∈ Transformerqm,1,H with H = O(log log q) and m = O(s4 log q), which,
given any valid input X = MachineOut(r) ∈ Zq×m2p   under the MPC protocol in vectorized form, has output
satisfying route(r) (X) = MachineIn(r+1) .
   Because at most s messages can be shared and received by each machine, and each message is of size at
most s, we can prove an single-headed alternative to Lemma B.7 with a somewhat suboptimal dependence on
embedding dimension. By applying by Lemma 3.2 with message size β = s, bounded number of messages s,
and context length N = q, there exists a transformer routes,s with H = 1 and m = O(s5 log q) that computes
MachineIn(r+1) from MachineOut(r+1) by regarding each outgoing message as belonging to Zs2p by adding
padding dimensions as needed.
   We improve the embedding dimension to m = O(s4 log q) by running in parallel O(log log N ) transformers
guaranteed by Lemma 3.2 that encode differently sized messages. The number of heads H increases at a
doubly-logarithmic rate because of a doubling trick employed on the size of message encodings used by
constituent part.




                                                        22
Proof. We describe an implementation of route(r) by considering any fixed input MachineOut(r) ∈ Zq×m
                                                                                                 2p . For
                                                                                                (r)
each i ∈ [q] and some integer sequence 1 = β0 < β1 < · · · < βH = s + 1, we partition MachineOuti into H
disjoint subsets as follows. For any h ∈ [H], let
                                n                                                       o
                                                           (r)
                      Senthi := (Msg, Dest) ∈ MachineOuti : dim(Msg) ∈ [βh−1 , βh ] ,
                                n                                                       o
                                                        (r+1)
                      Rcvdhi := (Msg, Src) ∈ MachineIni        : dim(Msg) ∈ [βh−1 , βh ] ,

and note that MachineOuti = ˙ h=1 Senthi and MachineIni         = ˙ h=1 Rcvdhi .
                          (r)   SH                        (r+1)  SH
   For each h ∈ [H], note that dim(Msg) ≤ βh , and Senthi = Rcvdhi ≤ s/βh−1 . As a result, Lemma 3.2
                                                             (r)                 (r)
guarantees the existence of a single-headed transformer routeh such that routeh (Senth ) = Rcvdh ) with
embedding dimension mh ≤ Cs βh log(q)/βh−1 for some sufficiently large universal constant C.
                               4           4
                                                      (r)              (r)
    We defined route(r) as the computation of route1 , . . . , routeH as H parallel heads of self-attention with
                                                                                       PH
disjoint embeddings concatenated into in m-dimensional embedding space with m = h=1 mh . We conclude
by letting                              (
                                          1                       if h = 0,
                                   βh =
                                          min(2βh−1
                                                 3
                                                     , q + 1) if h ∈ [H],
noting that βH = q + 1 for H = O(log log q), and bounding m:
                                    H                                        H
                                    X Cs4 log(q)βh                           X      1
                               m≤             4           ≤ 2Cs4 log(q) ·
                                             βh−1                                  βh−1
                                    h=1                                      h=1
                                                    H
                                                    X       1
                                  ≤ 2Cs4 log(q) ·                = O(s4 log q).
                                                          2h−1
                                                    h=1

Proof of Lemma B.5. To simulate a round of MPC protocol π by mapping MachineIn(r) and ρr to MachineIn(r+1) ,
the single-layer transformer round(r) first computes MachineOut(r) element-wise and then properly routes
messages in MachineOut(r) to their proper destination. We can define round(r) = route(r) ◦ Localr for route(r)
                                        (r)                   (r)
in Lemma B.7 and Localr,i (MachineIni , ρr,i ) = MachineOuti . This can be immediately constructed as a
single-layer transformer by prepending the embeddings Q, K, V of the construction of route(r) with Localr ,
using Q ◦ Localr , K ◦ Localr , V ◦ Localr as the embeddings of round(r) .

B.3     Additional graph problems solvable by log-depth transformers
Theorem 8.1 and Corollary 8.2 of Coy and Czumaj (2022) give efficient MPC protocols for other graph problems
besides connectivity, and therefore, as corollaries of Theorem 3.1, we also obtain log-depth transformers for
these problems.
Corollary B.8 (Spanning forest construction). For any constant ϵ ∈ (0, 1) and any D ≤ N , there exists
a transformer in TransformerNm,L,H with m = O(N ), H = O(log log N ), and L = O(log D) that computes a
                                                  ϵ

rooted spanning forest of any input graph G = (V, E) with |V |, |E| = O(N ) where each connected component
has diameter at most D.
Corollary B.9 (Minimum spanning forest construction). For any constant ϵ ∈ (0, 1) and any DM SF ≤ N ,
there exists a transformer in TransformerN
                                         m,L,H with m = O(N ), H = O(log log N ), and L = O(log DM SF )
                                                             ϵ

that identifies the connected components of any input graph G = (V, E) with |V |, |E| = O(N ) and poly(N )-
bounded integer weights whose minimum spanning forest has diameter at most DM SF .




                                                          23
                                        (Qh,i , Kh,i , Vh,i )




                      Query                                          Key/value
                      propagation                                    propagation
                      machines                                       machines




                                        Token machines
                                                                               Q⊤
                                                                                h,i Kh,i′




                                                                                            Inner product machines



Figure 5: This construction employs M 2 inner product machines to compute the entries of the softmax
matrix, and M token machines to compute all values of Q(·), K(·), V (·). What is most complex about the
construction are the additional machines and message routing needed to propagate these values efficiently
between the inner product machines and the token machines, in particular carefully aggregating the output of
the attention mechanism and computing its normalization. To this end, the protocol uses additional machines,
                                                     ′
organized into a tree with branching factor b = O(N δ −δ ) and depth D = O( δ1+α
                                                                              ′ −δ ).




C      Proofs from Section 3.2
C.1     Proof of Theorem 3.4
As in Appendix B.2, we give and prove a generalized version of Theorem 3.4 that broadens the family of
considered transformers to include masked models and those that contain extra blank chain-of-thought tokens,
using notation from Appendix A.
Theorem C.1 (Generalization of Theorem 3.4). For any transformer T ∈ TransformerN,M                        N,M
                                                                                  m,L,H (or MaskTransformerm,L,H )
with mH = O(N δ ) for δ ∈ (0, 1) and M = Θ(N 1+α ) for α ≥ 0 and for any δ ′ ∈ (δ, 1), there exists an
                                                                                         δ′
O( L(1+α)
     δ ′ −δ )-round (1 + 2α + δ , δ )-MPC protocol with q = O(M ) machines with s = O(N ) local memory
                               ′ ′                             2

that outputs the same sequence as T (X) for all X ∈ RN .
    Theorem 3.4 is an immediate consequence by setting M := N and α := 0.
Proof. It suffices to show that an O( δ1+α  ′ −δ )-round MPC protocol π that simulates a single-layer transformer

T ∈ Transformerm,m,m,1,H with m-dimensional input and output embeddings since a depth-L transformer
                      M

can be constructed by applying L such protocols sequentially. Moreover, we can ignore the difference between
the input context length N and the context length with padding M by assuming that the input contains M
tokens.
    Concretely, we consider H heads with embeddings (Qh , Kh , Vh )h∈[H] , element-wise output MLP ψ =
(ψ1 , . . . , ψM ), and any fixed masks Λ1 , . . . , ΛH ∈ {−∞, 0}M ×M . We show that there exists some π such that



                                                                24
for any Input = X ∈ RM ×m ,
                                           H
                                                                                        !
                                           X
                         π(X) = ψ X +            softmax(Qh (X)Kh (X) + Λh )Vh (X) ,
                                                                         T

                                           h=1

where numbers in X and all intermediate products of the transformer computation can be represented with
p = O(log M ) bit precision.
                                                                                  ′
    Our MPC protocol π, which will use q = O(M 2 ) machines and s = Θ(N δ ) words of local memory per
machine, assigns each of the q machines to one of four possible roles: token machine, inner product machine,
query propagation machine, and key/value propagation machine. We describe these machines below. For the
sake of readability, we identify machines with easily interpretable descriptions and use the bijection ID to map
each of those to a token in [q] that is used for routing messages. Our protocol has two important parameters:
                           ′
b = ⌊s/(4mH)⌋ = O(N δ −δ ) is the branching factor of the protocol, and D = ⌈logb (M )⌉ = O( δ1+α     ′ −δ ) is the

depth of the protocol.
    At a high level (see Figure 5 for a corresponding diagram), the protocol involves computing all intermediate
products of the of a transformer unit by performing MLP computations in N token machines, computing
inner products in N 2 inner product machines, and using O(N 2 ) other propagation machines arranged in trees
to share information between the two in O(D) rounds. The protocol draws inspiration from Appendix C.6.1
of Sanford et al. (2023), which uses a similar construction to simulate transformers with Congest protocols
on fixed graphs. It is also similar to the MPC implementation of the MPI AllReduce functionality (MPICH,
2023) described by Agarwal et al. (2014).

   • Machine i ∈ [M ] is a token machine that performs all element-wise computation on the ith token
     embedding, including the computation of (Qh,i (Xi ), Kh,i (Xi ), Vh,i (Xi ))h∈[H] and the final M LP output
     ψi . Let ID(i) = i.

   • Machine (i, i′ ) ∈ [M ]2 is an inner product machine designed to compute the inner products (Qh,i (Xi )T Kh,i′ (Xi′ ))h∈[H] .

   • Machine (Q, i, d, k) for token i ∈ [M ], depth d ∈ [D − 1] and position k ∈ [bd ] is a query propagation
     machine. This machine is responsible for handling communication of query tokens (Qh,i (Xi ))h∈[H] and
     of all partially-computed attention outputs for the ith token between token machine i and inner product
     machines (i, i′ ) for

                             i′ ∈ Descendantsd,k := bD−d (k − 1), . . . , bD−d k ∩ [M ].
                                                     


      Concretely, if ℓ = 1, then the machine communicates with token machine i and query propagation
      machines (Q, i, d + 1, k ′ ) for

                                      k ′ ∈ Childrenk := {b(k − 1) + 1, . . . , bk} .

      If ℓ = D − 1, then it communicates with inner product machines (i, i′ ) for i′ ∈ Childrenk ∩ [M ] and
      query propagation machine (Q, i, d − 1, ⌊k/b⌋). Otherwise, it communicates with query propagation
      machines (Q, i, d − 1, Parentk ), for Parentk := ⌊k/b⌋, and (Q, i, d + 1, k ′ ) for k ′ ∈ Childrenk .
   • Machine (KV, i, d, k) is a key/value propagation machine. This machine is analogous to a query
     propagation machine, except that it is responsible for the communication of key and value to-
     kens (Qh,i (Xi ), Vh,i (Xi ))h∈[H] between token machine i and inner product machines (i, i′ ) for i′ ∈
     Descendantsd,k .
                                                           PD−1
   Since the total number of machines is q = M + M 2 + M d=1 bd = O(M 2 ), we conclude that the global
                                          ′
memory of the protocol is qs = O(N 2+2α+δ ), which means the protocol is (1 + 2α + δ ′ , δ ′ )-MPC. We simulate
the transformer using a four stage protocol using 2D + 3 = O( δ1+α
                                                                ′ −δ ) rounds of MPC computation.




                                                        25
Stage 1: Token dispersion. Because the input to an MPC protocol Input = X is divided equally
among machines 1, . . . , ⌈M mH/s⌉, the first round of MPC computation routes each input token Xi to its
                                                                            (1)                       (1)
respective token machine. This is completed by setting (i, Xi ) ∈ MachineOuti′ if (i, Xi ) ∈ MachineIni′ .
                 (2)
Thus, MachineIni = {(Src, Xi )} for all token machines i ∈ [M ].
Stage 2: Embedding propagation. In rounds 2, . . . , D + 1, π computes the respective key, query, and
value embeddings in each token machine and propagate them to respective inner product machines using the
query and key/value propagation machines. Concretely:
  • In round 2, each token machine i (whose memory contains Xi ) computes m-dimensional embeddings
    embeddings Qi := (Qh,i (Xi ))h∈[H] , Ki := (Kh,i (Xi ))h∈[H] , Vi := (Vh,i (Xi ))h∈[H] . It transmits each
    embedding to the respective depth-1 query and key/value propagation machine nodes, while also
                                                                                                            (r)
    preserving knowledge of its own Xi . (In all further rounds, we assume that ((i, Xi )) ∈ MachineOuti
    to ensure that token machine i can compute the skip-level connection at the end.) That is,
                                            (2)
                           MachineOuti            = {(i, Xi )}
                                                    ∪ {(ID(Q, i, 1, k ′ ), Qi ) : k ′ ∈ Children1 }
                                                    ∪ {(ID(KV, i, 1, k ′ ), (Ki , Vi )) : k ′ ∈ Children1 } .
     Note that the total amount of messages sent is b · mH + 2b · mH + m ≤ s and that the only machines
     receiving messages are size m-messages by token machines and size ≤ 4mH messages by query and
     key/value propagation machines.
  • In rounds r ∈ {3, . . . , D}, each query and key/value propagation machine of depth d = r − 2 passes
    embeddings onto their successors. That is,
                                      (r)
                     MachineOutID(Q,i,d,k) = {(ID(Q, i, d + 1, k ′ ), Qi ) : k ′ ∈ Childrenk } ,
                                     (r)
                    MachineOutID(KV,i,d,k) = {(ID(KV, i, d + 1, k ′ ), (Ki , Vi )) : k ′ ∈ Childrenk } .

  • In round D + 1, the depth-(D − 1) query and key/value propagation machines pass their embeddings
    onto their respective inner product machines. That is,
                                   (D+1)
                   MachineOutID(Q,i,D−1,k) = {(ID(i, k ′ ), Qi ) : k ′ ∈ Childrenk ∩ [M ]} ,
                                   (D+1)
                  MachineOutID(KV,i,D−1,k) = {(ID(k ′ , i), (Ki , Vi )) : k ′ ∈ k ′ ∈ Childrenk ∩ [M ]} .

Stage 3: Softmax computation. In rounds D +2, . . . , 2D +2, computes each inner product and iteratively
builds up each attention output by accumulating partial softmax computations. For each query propagation
machine (Q, i, d, k) and h ∈ [H], we let Si,d,k,h and Zi,d,k,h denote its partial normalization and softmax
computations respectively. That is,

                                       exp(Qh,i (Xi )T Kh,i′ (Xi′ ))1 {Λi,i′ = 0}
                              X
              Zi,d,k,h =
                           i′ ∈Descendantsd,k
                           (P
                               k′ ∈Childrenk Zi,d+1,k ,h
                                                          ′                     if d ≤ D − 1,
                      =
                             exp(Qh,i (Xi )T Kh,k (Xk ))      1 {Λi,k = 0} if d = D.
                               1
                                                       exp(Qh,i (Xi )T Kh,i′ (Xi′ ))Vh,i′ (Xi′ )1 {Λi,i′ = 0}
                                            X
              Si,d,k,h =
                           Zi,d,k,h ′
                                     i ∈Descendantsd,k
                                              Zi,d+1,k′ ,h
                           (P
                                k′ ∈Childrenk Zi,d,k,h · Si,d+1,k ,h
                                                                  ′     if d ≤ D − 1,
                      =
                             Vh,k (Xk )1 {Λi,k = 0}                          if d = D;

Note that Si,0,1,h = (softmax(Qh (X)Kh (X)T + Λh )Vh (X))i and let Si,d,k = (Si,d,k,h )h∈[H] ∈ RH×m and
Zi,d,k = (Zi,d,k,h )h∈[H] ∈ RH


                                                                 26
   • In round D + 2, each inner product machine computes its respective inner products and passes its
     partial softmax computations to its parent query propagation machine. As a result of round D + 1,
     each inner product machine (i, i′ ) recently received the embeddings necessary to compute the relevant
     inner product:
                         (d+2)
             MachineInID(i,i′ ) = {(ID(Q, i, D − 1, Parenti ), Qi ), (ID(KV, i′ , D − 1, Parenti′ ), (Ki′ , Vi′ ))} .

      It propagates the respective partial computations Si,D,i′ and Zi,D,i′ as follows:
                                           (D+2)
                           MachineOutID(i,i′ ) = {(ID(Q, i, D − 1, Parenti ), (Si,D,i′ , Zi,D,i′ ))} .

      Note that each depth-(D−1) query propagation machine receives messages of size at most b·(m+1)H ≤ s.
   • In rounds r ∈ {D + 3, . . . , 2D}, partial softmax computations are received by query propagation
     machines of depth d = 2D + 1 − r, added together, and passed along to their parent machines. That is,
     given
                         (r)
               MachineInID(Q,i,d,k) = {(ID(Q, i, d + 1, k ′ ), (Si,d+1,k′ , Zi,d+1,k′ )) : k ′ ∈ Childrenk } ,
      each respective machine computes Si,d,k and Zi,d,k recursively and propagates
                                           (r)
                           MachineOutID(Q,i,d,k) = {(ID(Q, i, d − 1, Parentk ), (Si,d,k , Zi,d,k )} .

   • In round 2D + 1, the top-most query propagation tokens pass their partial sums to the token machines:
                                                        (2D+1)
                                          MachineOutID(Q,i,1,k) = {(i, (Si,1,k , Zi,1,k ))} .

   • In round 2D + 2, the token machines compute their respective output of the transformer, T (X)i . Given
     input
                               (2D+2)
                   MachineIni         = {(k ′ , (Si,1,k′ , Zi,1,k′ )) : k ′ ∈ Children1 } ∪ {(i, Xi )} ,
      the token machine i computes Si,0,1 and Hi,0,1 and then
                                    H
                                                                                         !                 H
                                                                                                                            !
                                    X                                                                      X
             T (X)i = ψi     Xi +         softmax(Qh (X)Kh (X)      T
                                                                        + Λh )T
                                                                              i Vh (X)       = ψi   Xi +         Si,0,1,h       .
                                    h=1                                                                    h=1

      This quantity is used as an intermediate product for the final phase of computation.
Stage 4: Token compression. We invert Stage 1 by properly compressing the MPC output in the final
                                         (2D+2)
round 2D + 3. That is, we let MachineOuti       = {(⌊imH/s⌋ + 1, T (X)i )} for each token machine i ∈ [M ],
which ensures that the outputs are condensed in the proper order in machines 1, . . . , ⌈M mH/s⌉.
Precision analysis. In order for the proof to be fully sound, care must be taken to ensure that the
computation of each self-attention output Si,0,1,h is handled with proper numeric precision, as discussed in
Appendix A. We show that each Si,0,1,h is a valid implementation of its corresponding self-attention unit, per
Definition A.1.
    To do so, we let Ŝi,d,k,h and Ẑi,d,k,h denote the p-bit representations of Si,d,k,h and Zi,d,k,h , where scalars
of Ŝi,d,k,h and log(Ẑi,d,k,h ) are represented as discretized rational numbers z satisfying |z| ≤ 21 2p/2 and
z · 2p/2 ∈ Z. For some sufficiently small p′ = Θ(p), we assume that all embeddings Qh (X), Kh (X), Vh (X)
                                       ′              ′
have scalars z satisfying |z| ≤ 12 2p /2 and z · 2p /2 ∈ Z. We prove that for each h ∈ [H],

                                                                        1
                                                                       
                                            Si,0,1,h − Ŝi,d,k,h   =O       .
                                                                 ∞     2p′



                                                              27
   Boundedness of intermediate representations is not an issue because

                        log(Zi,d,k,h ) ≤ O(log(N ) + max
                                                       ′      i K(X)i′ |) = exp(O(p )),
                                                         |Q(X)T                    ′
                                                            i,i

and                                                                             ′
                                          ∥Si,d,k,h ∥∞ ≤ ∥V (X)∥∞ ≤ 2p /2 .
It remains to show that that all intermediate representations are sufficiently close to their exact counterparts.
We prove the following via an inductive argument for d = D, D − 1, . . . , 0:

                                                                      (2b)D−d
                                   log(Zi,d,k,h ) − log(Ẑi,d,k,h ) ≤           ,                                   (2)
                                                                        2p/2
                                                                        ′
                                                                      2p /2 (8b)D−d
                                             Si,d,k,h − Ŝi,d,k,h   ≤               .                               (3)
                                                                  ∞        2p/2
If (3) holds for d = 0, then the claim holds for sufficiently large p = Θ(p′ ).
    For the base case D, we verify (3) by
                                                                                                        1
                      Si,D,k,h − Ŝi,D,k,h       = Vh,k (Xk )1 {Λi,k = 0} − Ŝi,D,k,h              ≤        ,
                                             ∞                                               ∞         2p/2
due to the ability to access Vh,k (Xk ) and round it directly. We verify (2) due to the immediate access to and
boundedness of Qh,i (Xi )T Kh,k (Xk ):
                                                                                                                ′
                |log(Zi,d,k,h )| ≤ Qh,i (Xi )T Kh,k (Xk ) ≤ ∥Qh,i (Xi )∥2 ∥Kh,k (Xk )∥2 ≤ N · 2p /2 .

     We prove the inductive step for d − 1, assuming that the inductive hypothesis holds for d. We first address
Ẑi,d−1,k,h by employing the Lipschitzness of the log-sum-exp function.
                                                                                 !                                  !
                                            1          X                                  X
    log(Zi,d−1,k,h ) − log(Ẑi,d−1,k,h ) ≤ p/2 + log      exp(log(Zi,d,k′ ,h )) − log        exp(log(Ẑi,d,k′ ,h ))
                                          2            k′                                 k′
                                            1    X
                                         ≤ p/2 +     log(Zi,d,k′ ,h ) − log(Ẑi,d,k′ ,h )
                                          2      k′
                                             1           (2b)D−d   (2b)D−d+1
                                      ≤          +b·             ≤           .
                                          2p/2             2 p/2      2p/2
   To obtain (3) for d − 1, we first note that for sufficiently large p:
                                                                          !                               !!
                     Ẑi,d,k′ ,h Zi,d−1,k′ ,h                 Ẑi,d,k′ ,h                   Zi,d−1,k,h
                 1−                           = 1 − exp log                 + log
                      Zi,d,k,h Ẑi,d−1,k′ ,h                  Zi,d,k′ ,h                    Ẑi,d−1,k,h
                                                                                                 !
                                                                   Ẑi,d,k′ ,h       Zi,d−1,k,h
                                                 ≤1+2        log               + log
                                                                   Zi,d,k′ ,h        Ẑi,d−1,k,h
                                                     4 · (2b)D−d+1
                                                 ≤                 .
                                                           2p/2




                                                                  28
We conclude by using the fact that each Si,d−1,k,h is a convex combination of other Si,d,k,h .

                                               1        X     Zi,d,k′ ,h               Ẑi,d,k′ ,h
        Si,d−1,k,h − Ŝi,d−1,k,h       ≤           +                     Si,d,k′ ,h −               Ŝi,d,k′ ,h
                                   ∞       2   p/2
                                                        k′
                                                             Zi,d−1,k ,h
                                                                       ′              Ẑi,d−1,k′ ,h               ∞

                                          1    X Zi,d,k′ ,h                   Ẑi,d,k′ ,h Zi,d−1,k′ ,h
                                       ≤ p/2 +                   Si,d,k′ ,h −                          Ŝi,d,k′ ,h
                                        2      k′
                                                  Z i,d−1,k ′ ,h               Zi,d,k,h Ẑi,d−1,k′ ,h              ∞
                                          1    X Zi,d,k′ ,h
                                       ≤ p/2 +                   Si,d,k′ ,h − Ŝi,d,k′ ,h
                                        2       ′
                                                  Zi,d−1,k′ ,h
                                                        k
                                                                                           ∞

                                             X Zi,d,k′ ,h                     Ẑi,d,k′ ,h Zi,d−1,k′ ,h
                                           +                 Ŝi,d,k′ ,h   1−
                                              ′
                                                Z        ′
                                                  i,d−1,k ,h             ∞    Zi,d,k,h Ẑi,d−1,k′ ,h
                                                k
                                                          ′
                                               1        2p /2 (8b)D−d     ′   X Zi,d,k′ ,h       Ẑi,d,k′ ,h Zi,d−1,k′ ,h
                                       ≤           +                  + 2p /2                 1−
                                           2   p/2           2 p/2
                                                                              k′
                                                                                 Zi,d−1,k′ ,h    Zi,d,k,h Ẑi,d−1,k′ ,h
                                                    ′                                                 ′
                                           2p /2 (8b)D−d     p′ /2 4 · (2b)
                                                                           D−d+1
                                                                                   2p /2 (8b)D−d+1
                                       ≤2·               + 2      ·              ≤                 .
                                                2p/2                     2p/2             2p/2
   Owing to the fact that D and p′ are constants and b = N O(1) , a sufficiently large choice of p guarantees
that the implementation is valid.

C.2     Proof of Corollary 3.5
Corollary 3.5. Let ϵ ∈ (0, 1) be any constant, and let D ≥ N ϵ . Assume Conjecture 2.4, and suppose there
exists T ∈ TransformerN
                      m,L,H with mH = O(D
                                            1−ϵ
                                                ) that decides connectivity of any input graph with connected
components having diameter ≤ D. Then L = Ω(log D).
   We prove Corollary 3.5 by combining Theorem C.1 and Conjecture 2.4.
Proof. Fix any D ≤ N with D ≥ N ξ for some ξ ∈ (0, 1]. Let C1 denote a cycle graph on D vertices, and let
C2 denote the union of two cycle graphs each with D/2 vertices.
    Suppose there is a transformer T ∈ TransformerN      m,L,H with mH = O(D
                                                                                 1−ϵ
                                                                                     ) that determines the connectiv-
ity of graphs with at most N edges and connected components with diameter at most D. We will show that
it can be used to design an Θ(L)-round MPC protocol π that distinguishes graphs C1 and C2 with n = D
edges.
    Let π ′ be an MPC protocol that exactly computes the output of T using taking R = O(L) rounds with
local memory s = O(D1−ϵ/2 ) and    q = O(N ) machines, which is guaranteed to exist by Theorem C.1.
                                                 2

    Let n := 2 4 and k := n . We design π with the same local memory and machine count to determine
                  D                N

the identity of input graph G = (V, E) ∈ {C1 , C2 } provided as an arbitrary sequence of n edges. Let u ∈ V
be an arbitrary vertex in G.
    Using a constant number of MPC rounds, π converts G into a graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) with |E ′ | = kn + k ≤ N
and diameter n + 2 ≤ D such that G′ is connected if and only if G = C1 . We do so by letting G′ be composed
of k copies G1 , . . . , Gk of G on separate vertices, along with k extra edges connecting the vertex corresponding
to u in each Gj (say uj ∈ Gj ) to u1 ∈ G1 . This ensures that the connectivity correspondence and edge
count diameter bounds are met. Since G′ can be produced by simply copying edges from G and adding an
additional edge each time an edge containing u is copied, π can produce G′ in O(1) rounds.
    Then, π simulates π ′ on G′ and returns its output. Since G′ is connected if and only if G = C1 , this
protocol suffices to distinguish C1 and C2 . Because the protocol uses s = O(n1−ϵ/2 ) local memory and
q = O(n2/ξ ) machines, Conjecture 2.4 implies that π (and hence T ) only exists if L = Ω(log n) = Ω(log N ).




                                                                   29
D      Proofs from Section 4.1
D.1     Proof of Theorem 4.2
Theorem 4.2. For any k ∈ N and alphabet Σ with |Σ| ≤ N , there exists T ∈ MaskTransformerN
                                                                                         m,L,H that
computes hopk : Σ → (Σ ∪ {⊥}) with m = O(1), L = ⌊log2 k⌋ + 2, and H = 1.
                 N           N

Proof. We design a masked transformer that implements hopk in two phases. The first two layers compute
find1X (i) for each i ∈ [N ] using a similar approach to the induction heads construction of Bietti et al. (2023).
                                                                         ℓ−2
The subsequent layers employ a doubling trick to compute each find2X (i) after ℓ layers.
    To do so we employ two technical lemmas (which are proved in Appendix F.4) that describe the
implementation of masked self-attention units that copy .
Lemma D.1. For some m ≥ d + 2, τ : [N ] × Rm → [N ], and ρ : Rm → Rd , there exists an attention head
lookUpτ,ρ ∈ MaskAttnN
                    m with precision p = O(log N ) and m ≥ d + 2 satisfying lookUpτ,ρ (X)i,:d = ρ(Xτ (i,Xi ) ).


Lemma D.2. For any finite alphabet Σ, m ≥ d + 2, µ1 , µ2 : Rm → Σ, and ρ : Rm → Rd , there exists an
attention head lastOccurrenceµ,ρ ∈ MaskAttnN m with precision p = O(log(N |Σ|)) such that,
                                         (
                                           ρ(⃗0)   if ∀ i′ < i : µ1 (Xi′ ) ̸= µ2 (Xi ),
                 lastOccurrence(X)i,:d =
                                           ρ(Xi′ ) if i′ = max {i′ < i : µ1 (Xi′ ) = µ2 (Xi )} .
   The first layer obtains the previous token Xi−1 from each Xi . This is accomplished via the self-attention
head lookUpτ,ρ with τ (i, Xi ) = i − 1 and ρ(Xi ) = Xi .
   The second layer retrieves (find1X (i), Xfind1X (i) ) for each i ∈ [N ] by finding the most recent token whose
preceding token is Xi . It does so by employing the lastOccurrenceµ1 ,µ2 ,ρ primitive on the intermediate state
Xi1 = (Xi , Xi−1 ) with µ1 (Xi1 ) = Xi−1 , µ2 (Xi1 ) = Xi , and ρ(Xi1 ) = (i, Xi ).
   • If find1X (i) > 0, then lastOccurrenceµ1 ,µ2 ,ρ (Xi1 ) = (find1X (i), Xfind1X (i) ).

   • Otherwise, it obtains ⃗0 and performs no further passing, returning ⊥ after all L layers.
If k = 1, the transformer returns T (X)i = Xfind1X (i) = hopk (X)i .
                       P⌊log k⌋                                                  Pℓ
    Otherwise, let k := j=02 kj 2j for some kj ∈ {0, 1}, and let k:ℓ = j=0 kj 2j . Construct a transformer
inductively to ensure that the ith output of the ℓth layer Xiℓ ∈ Rm for ℓ ≥ 2 contains an encoding of
                                                                                      
                                      2ℓ−2                          k
                             Xi , findX    (i), Xfind2ℓ−2 (i) , findX:ℓ−2 (i), X k:ℓ−2   .
                                                         X                            findX      (i)

Note that the base case holds for ℓ = 2, since findkX:0 (0) = find1X (0) if k0 = 0 and is i otherwise.
   For each ℓ = 1, . . . , ⌊log2 k⌋ + 1, we assume that the inductive hypothesis holds up to layer ℓ and prove
                                                                                                              ℓ−2
that it also holds for layer ℓ + 1. To do so, we use a lookUpτ,ρ self-attention head with τ (i, Xiℓ ) = find2X (i)
and
                                            2ℓ−2                          k
                             ρ(Xiℓ ) = (findX    (i), Xfind2ℓ−2 (i) , findX:ℓ−2 (i), X k:ℓ−2 ),
                                                               X                         findX         (i)

which ensures that Xiℓ+1 can encode
                                        ℓ−1              ℓ−2            ℓ−2
                                  findX
                                      2
                                              (i) = find2X     (findX
                                                                    2
                                                                              (i))
                                 Xfind2ℓ−1 (i) = Xfind2ℓ−2 (find2ℓ−2 (i))
                                        X
                                                 ( X              X
                                                        k:ℓ−2        2ℓ−2
                                       k:ℓ−1      find        (find  X (i))          if kℓ−1 = 1
                                 findX (i) =            X
                                                        k:ℓ−2
                                                  findX (i)                          if kℓ−1 = 0
                                                 
                                                 X k:ℓ−2              ℓ−2           if kℓ−1 = 1
                                                     findX      (find2X    (i))
                                 X k:ℓ−1 =
                                   findX     (i) X k:ℓ−2                            if kℓ−1 = 0.
                                                        findX       (i)



                                                                   30
   As a result, the output of layer L = ⌊log2 k⌋ + 2 contains an encoding of

                                         Xfindk:L−2 (i) = Xfindk (i) = hopk (X)i
                                                                    X
                                               X


for each i ∈ [N ]. This is returned as the output of T (X).


D.2      Proof of Corollary 4.3
Corollary 4.3. Assuming Conjecture 2.4, for any constants ξ ∈ (0, 1/2] and ϵ ∈ (0, 1), and any even
k = Θ(N ξ ), every transformer T ∈ MaskTransformerN
                                                  m,L,H with mH = O(k
                                                                      1−ϵ
                                                                          ) that computes hopk has depth
L = Ω(log k).
Proof. The proof is analogous to that of Corollary 3.5. Let C1 be a cycle on k vertices, and C2 be the
union of two cycles each on k/2 vertices. So both C1 and C2 have k edges. We show that the existence of
T ∈ TransformerN   m,L,H with mH = O(k        ) such that T (X) = hopk (X) can be used to design an Θ(L)-round
                                          1−ϵ

MPC protocol π to solve the task.
    As a result of Theorem C.1, there exists an MPC protocol π ′ that exactly computes T with R = Θ(L)
rounds with local memory s = O(D1−ϵ/2 ) and q = O(N 2 ) machines. On input G = (V, E) ∈ {C1 , C2 }, we
design a constant-round protocol that computes an sequence X ∈ ΣN such that hopk (X)N exactly determines
the identity of G.
    Since the k edges are passed to π in an unknown ordering with unknown labelings, we let V = [k]
and denote the edges as e1 = {u1 , v1 } , . . . , ek = {uk , vk }. We define an operator next over the domain
{(u, v), (v, u) : {u, v} ∈ E} as follows: for {u, v} ∈ E, let next(u, v) := (v ′ , u) where v ′ ∈ V is the unique
vertex v ′ ̸= v such that {u, v ′ } ∈ E. Notice that next is well-defined because all vertices in a cycle have
degree 2. If G = C2 , then nextk/2 (ui , vi ) = (ui , vi ) for any i ∈ [k].
    To set up our encoding of G as a sequence X, we first construct a gadget for each edge ei that will be used
to compute a single next(ui , vi ). Under the alphabet Σ = [k] ∪ {†, ⋆, _}, we define the nine-token sequence

                                             ei = ⋆ ui † vi ui † vi ⋆ _.

This gadget ensures that two hops will swap the values of ui and vi . That is

                     find2ei ◦ui (10) = find1ei ◦ui (6) = 4,                       Xfind2e ◦u (10) = vi ,
                                                                                           i   i

                     find2ei ◦vi (10) = find1ei ◦vi (8) = 2,                       Xfind2e ◦v (10) = ui .
                                                                                           i   i


Likewise, concatenating sequences corresponding to overlapping edges facilitates multiple hops. For example,
if e1 = (1, 2), e2 = (3, 4), e3 = (2, 3), then

                      find2e1 ◦e2 ◦e3 ◦2 (28) = 22,                        Xfind2e ◦e ◦e ◦2 (28) = 3,
                                                                                   1   2   3

                      find4e1 ◦e2 ◦e3 ◦2 (28) = 13,                        Xfind4e ◦e ◦e ◦2 (28) = 4,
                                                                                   1   2   3

                      find4e1 ◦e2 ◦e3 ◦3 (28) = 2,                         Xfind4e ◦e ◦e ◦3 (28) = 1.
                                                                                   1   2   3


   Let
                                             E := (e1 ◦ e2 ◦ · · · ◦ ek )k/2 ◦ 1
be a length Nk := 9k · k2 + 1 sequence and let X = (_)N −Nk ◦ E. We show that hopk (X)N = hopk (E)Nk = 1
if and only if G = C2 .
    Without loss of generality, let {j, j + 1} = eij ∈ E for all j ∈ [ k2 − 1]. Let ei0 = {1, v ∗ }, where v ∗ = k2 if
G = C2 and v ∗ = k if G = C1 . Assume without loss of generality that i1 > i0 . We argue inductively that for
any j ∈ [ k2 ]:



                                                               31
    1. Every two hops simulates a single step of next:
                                                                (
                                                                 j     if j + 1 < k2 or G = C1 ,
                               hop2j (E)Nk = nextj (1, v ∗ )1 =
                                                                 1     if j = k2 , G = C2 ;

    2. Every two hops never “jumps” by more than one repetition of all edges gadgets:

                                           find2j            2j−2
                                               E (Nk ) ≥ findE    (Nk ) − 9(k − 1);

    3. The executed gadget corresponds to the correct edge and the gadget is executed correctly:

                                     find2j
                                         E (Nk ) ∈ {9kj + 9ij + ι : j ∈ N, ι ∈ {2, 4}} .
                                                       ′             ′



    If all three conditions are met, then hopk (X)N = 1 if and only if G = C1 from condition 1.
    We first show that the base case holds for j = 1. Since i1 > i0 , the second-last time 1 appears in the E is
in the final encoding ei1 . By the two-case analysis of the ei1 gadget, we validate that hop2 (E)Nk = 2 and
conditions (1) and (3) hold. Since ei1 cannot be the first edge encoding appearing in e1 ◦ e2 ◦ · · · ◦ ek , owing
to it following ei0 ), condition (2) is satisfied.
    Suppose that the inductive hypotheses holds up to j < k2 . Then, we argue that it holds for j + 1.
Since hop2j (E)Nk = j + 1 (from condition (1)) and find2j  E (Nk ) resides at the left-most side of the gadget
for eij (from condition (3)), the two subsequent findE iterations must occur in the gadget eij+1 . Because
find2j
    E (Nk ) ≥ 9k(k − j) (from condition (2)), all edges appear in the k gadgets to the left of findE (Nk ),
                                                                                                           2j

and all other edges (including eij+1 ) must occur before the next occurrence of eij . Thus, the two hops
occur in the eij+1 gadget (within distance 9(k − 1)) and results in a properly positioned find2j+2
                                                                                                 E     (Nk ) with
hop2j+2 (E)Nk = nextj+1 (1, v ∗ )1 .
    Since an MPC protocol can convert G to X using a constant number of layers, and because π ′ outputs
T (X)N = 1 if and only if G = C1 , we can construct a protocol of π by simulating π ′ . Because the protocol π
uses s = O(k 1−ϵ/2 ) local memory and q = O(k 2/ξ ) machines, Conjecture 2.4 implies that the existence of T
requires L = Ω(log k).

E      Proofs from Section 5
E.1     Multi-player pointer chasing communication complexity
We introduce the multi-pass multi-player blackboard communication model studied by Guha and McGregor
(2009) and Assadi and N (2021) to prove lower bounds for multi-pass streaming algorithms. A protocol in this
model specifies how k players, each possessing a portion of a shared input, can jointly compute a function on
the input over the course of R rounds of communication. In each round, all players take turns to broadcast
an s-bit message to all other players. We provide a formal definition of the model as described in Section 6 of
Assadi and N (2021).
Definition E.1. A k-player R-round s-space sequential blackboard communication protocol includes k players
P1 , . . . , Pk . On input Z that can be partitioned into (Z1 , . . . , Zk ), each player Pj is provided with its respective
Zj . In each round, players communicate via a shared blackboard. That is, in round r and in order Pk , . . . , P1 ,
each player Pj writes a message Πrj ∈ {0, 1}s on the blackboard (which can be viewed by all players) as a
potentially randomized function of input Zj and all information on the blackboard. After the conclusion of R
rounds, the final message ΠR     1 is the output of the protocol.

   Assadi and N (2021) proves a lower bound on the round complexity necessary to solve the well-studied
multi-party pointer chasing problem of Nisan and Wigderson (1993). We present the problem as defined by
Assadi and N (2021).



                                                            32
Definition E.2. For q, k ∈ Z+ , let an (q, k)-layered graph G = (V, E) have disjoint vertex layers V1 , . . . , Vk+1
with V = V1 ∪ · · · ∪ Vk+1 and each |Vj | = q and edge layers E1 , . . . , Ek with E = E1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ek and each Ej
being a perfect matching between Vj and Vj+1 . The pointer chasing task is provides a (q, k)-layered graph G,
an arbitrary v ∈ V1 , and an arbitrary equipartition Vk+11
                                                            and Vk+1 2
                                                                           of Vk+1 as input and asks whether v is
connected to a vertex in Vk+1 or Vk+1 .
                            1       2


   Assadi and N (2021) give the following lower bound.
Proposition E.3 (Proposition 4.12 of Assadi and N, 2021). Consider a k-player R-round s-space sequential
blackboard protocol that solves the (q, k)-pointer chasing task where each player Pj is provided with the
matching Ej and v and Vk+11       2
                              , Vk+1 are globally known. Then, the protocol succeeds with probability at least 23
only if R ≥ k or s = Ω( k5 ).
                        q


   All of the lower bounds in Section 5 are most naturally proved by reducing from hopk , rather than
pointer chasing. So we first prove a lower bound for hopk using the lower bound for pointer chasing from
Proposition E.3.
Proposition E.4. Consider a k-player R-round s-space sequential               blackboard protocol that computes
hopk (X)N on any X ∈ ΣN for Σ = [2q + 2] with q = 2k                    where each player Pj is provided with
                                                                   N 

X j := (X2(k−j)q+1 , . . . , X2(k−j+1)q ), except for P1 , who is given X 1 := (X2(k−1)q+1 , . . . , XN ). Then, the
protocol succeeds with probability at least 23 only if R ≥ k or s = Ω( kN6 ).

Proof. Assuming the existence of a k-player R-round s-space sequential blackboard protocol for hopk (X)N
as described above, we design a protocol for solving (q, k)-pointer chasing with R rounds and s-size messages.
The claimed lower bound will then follow by Proposition E.3.
    Consider any pointer chasing input with universally known V1 , . . . , Vk+1 , v ∈ V1 , and Vk+1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                    and Vk+12
                                                                                                                , and
each player Pj knowing matching Ej . We recursively define v1 , . . . , vk +1 such that v1 = v and (vj , vj+1 ) ∈ Ej ,
noting that the output hinges on whether vk+1 ∈ Vk+1     1
                                                            .
   Without loss of generality, let v = 1 and
                                          (
                                            {1, . . . , q}      if j is odd,
                                     Vj =
                                            {q + 1, . . . , 2q} if j is even.

Each player independently determines their substring X j of a input X to hopk before running the aforemen-
tioned protocol:
   • Player P1 encodes X 1 by letting XN = s = 1 and for any i ∈ 1, . . . , 2q, letting
                                       (
                                         i+1
                                             ∈ V1 if i is odd,
                                  Xi = ′2
                                    1
                                         i ∈ V2    if i is even, ( 2i , i′ ) ∈ E1 .

      This ensures that that every integer in {1, . . . , 2q} appears exactly once in X11 , . . . , X2q
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                        , which in turn
      guarantees that findX (N ) = (k − 1 + 1)q + 2 and that Xfind1X (N ) = v2 where (1, i ) ∈ E1 .
                          1                                                                     ′


   • For any j ∈ {2, . . . , k − 1}, player Pj encodes Ej as X j as follows. If j is odd, then for every
     i ∈ {1, . . . , 2q},                 (
                                      j
                                            i+1
                                                ∈ Vj if i is odd,
                                     Xi = ′2
                                            i ∈ Vj+1 if i is even, ( 2i , i′ ) ∈ Ej .
      Alternatively, if j is even,
                                             (
                                              q + i+1
                                                    2 ∈ Vj     if i is odd,
                                     Xij =
                                              i′ ∈ Vj+1        if i is even, ( 2i , i′ ) ∈ Ej .


                                                          33
      Since every odd token corresponds to a vertex in Vj and each subsequent token corresponds to the
      vertex it’s connected to by Ej , we can ensure that for every i ∈ [2q]:

                                          (X2(k−j+1)+i , Xfind1X (2(k−j+1)+i) ) ∈ Ej .

      Hence, it follows inductively that Xfindj (N ) = vj+1 .
                                                   X


   • Player Pk encodes X k if k is odd by letting
                                    
                                     2 ∈ Vk if i is odd,
                                     i+1

                       Xi = Xi = 2q + 1
                         k
                                                  if i is even, ( 2i , v) ∈ Ek , and v ∈ Vk+1
                                                                                           1
                                                                                              ,
                                      2q + 2      if i is even, ( 2 , v) ∈ Ek , and v ∈ Vk+1 .
                                                                   i
                                    
                                                                                          2


      Likewise, if k is even,
                                   
                                   q + 2 ∈ Vk             if i is odd,
                                       i+1

                          Xi = Xi = 2q + 1
                           k
                                                           if i is even, ( 2i , v) ∈ Ek , and v ∈ Vk+1
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                       ,
                                    2q + 2                 if i is even, ( 2 , v) ∈ Ek , and v ∈ Vk+1
                                                                            i
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                       .
                                   


These jointly ensure that
                                                              (
                                                                  2q + 1   if vk+1 ∈ Vk+1
                                                                                       1
                                                                                          ,
                                hopk (X)N = Xfindk (N ) =
                                                       X
                                                                  2q + 2   if vk+1 ∈ Vk+1
                                                                                       2
                                                                                          .

    Therefore, by formatting E1 , . . . , Ek appropriately as X, running the protocol for hopk (X)N , and observing
that the final output of player P 1 is 2q + 1 if and only if vk+1 ∈ Vk+1
                                                                       1
                                                                          , there exists a k-player R-round s-space
protocol for pointer chasing. Hence, by Proposition E.3, the protocol for hopk (X)N must use R ≥ k rounds
or s = Ω( kN6 ) space.

E.2     Proofs of Section 5.2
Corollary 5.2. A multi-layer RNN of depth L and width m as above with YN = hopk (X)N satisfies either
L ≥ k or m = Ω( kN6 ).
Proof. Suppose there exists a multi-layer RNN computing output Y with YN,1 = hopk (X)N from input X
with intermediate states Z1 , . . . , ZL−1 and hidden states H 1 , . . . , H L . For any ℓ ∈ [L] and i ≤ i′ , note that
Ziℓ , . . . , Ziℓ′ can be determined exactly from Hi−1
                                                   ℓ
                                                       and Ziℓ−1 , . . . , Ziℓ−1
                                                                              ′  . Given this RNN, we provide a multi-
player blackboard communication protocol for solving hopk (X)N under the input model of Proposition E.4.
     In round r, we assume inductively that each player Pj knows Z ℓ−1,j = (Z2(k−j)q+1        ℓ−1               ℓ−1
                                                                                                     , . . . , Z2(k−j+1)q ),
except for P1 , who knows Z ℓ−1,1 = (Z2(k−1)q+1
                                       ℓ−1                 ℓ−1
                                                , . . . , ZN   ). In descending order, each player Pj computes
Z and H2(k−j+1)q —writing the latter on the blackboard—from Z ℓ−1,j and H2(k−j)q
  ℓ,j        ℓ                                                                     ℓ
                                                                                          ,which was written on
the blackboard by the previous player. Thus, player P 1 after round L knows and outputs ZN,1       L
                                                                                                      = YN,1 =
hopk (X)N , which provides an L-round protocol m-space protocol.
     So the claimed lower bounds on width and depth follow from Proposition E.4.

E.3     Proofs of Section 5.3
Corollary 5.3. Any T ∈ KernelFormerN
                                   m,m′ ,L,H with T (X)N = hopk (X)N satisfies either L ≥ k or mm Hp =
                                                                                                 ′

Ω( k6 ).
   N


Proof. Under the distribution of input X = (X 1 , . . . , X k ) to players P1 , . . . , Pk stipulated in the statement
of Proposition E.4, we explain how the players can all compute the outcome of a single layer of H-headed


                                                            34
kernelized attention in a single round of a blackboard protocol. It is immediate that a depth L network can
be simulated in L rounds.
    On input X, consider H kernelized self-attention units with embeddings (Q′1 , K1′ , V1 ), . . . , (Q′H , KH′
                                                                                                                 , VH )
and output MLP ψ. Each player Pj immediately computes its embeddings (Qh (X ), Kh (X ), Vh (X ))h∈[H] ,
                                                                                ′    j    ′      j           j
                                        ′
followed by (Kh′ (X j )T Vh (X j )) ∈ Rm ×m for each h ∈ [H]. Because the object is to compute for each h
                                                                       k
                                                                       X
                           ψ(Q′h (X)Kh′ (X)T Vh (X)) = ψ(Q′h (X)             Kh′ (X j )T Vh (X j )),
                                                                       j=1

each player writes their (Kh′ (X j )T Vh (X j ))h∈[H] using message size s = Θ(mm′ Hp). Each can then construct
Kh′ (X)T Vh (X)) by reading the board, and use it to compute its respective outputs without requiring
supplemental communication.
    Hence, T (and thus hopk (X)N ) can be simulated using an L-round blackboard protocol with message
size s = Θ(mm′ Hp), and the corollary follows from Proposition E.4.
Corollary 5.4. Any T ∈ Λw,g -AttnN
                                 m,L,H with T (X)N = hopk (X)N satisfies either L ≥ k or (w + gk )mHp =
                                                                                              N

Ω( kN6 ).
Proof. As in the proof of Corollary 5.3, we explain how each player can compute their respective outputs of a
single unit of self-attention masked by Λw,g .
   To compute the output corresponding to Xi , note that it is necessary to only know the embeddings
corresponding to Xi−w , Xi−w+1 , . . . , Xi+w and Xg , X2g , . . . , X⌊N/g⌋g . Thus, player X j can compute the
outputs of all of their inputs X j = (X2(k−j)q+1 , . . . , X2(k−j+1)q ) given access to

                          X2(k−j)q+1−w , . . . , X2(k−j)q , X2(k−j+1)q+1 , . . . , X2(k−j+1)q+w ,

as well as Xg , X2g , . . . , X⌊N/g⌋g .
   Therefore, the protocol can be simulated if each player X j writes inputs

                      X2(k−j)q+1 , . . . , X2(k−j)q+w , X2(k−j+1)q−w+1 , . . . , X2(k−j+1)q ∈ Rm ,

in addition to all Xi ∈ X j such that i ≡ 0 (mod g). This can be accomplished by a protocol where each
player writes s = O((w + gk
                          N
                             )mp) bits of information on the blackboard.
    By repeating this protocol in parallel for every head and sequentially for every layer, T and hopk (X)N
can be simulated, and hence the claim follows from Proposition E.4.

E.4     Proofs of Section 5.4
Corollary 5.6. Any T ∈ MaskTransformerN   +NCoT
                                        m,1,H       that computes hopk (X)N with NCoT tokens of chain-of-
thought requires either NCoT ≥ k or mHp = Ω( kN6 ).
Proof. We reduce to Proposition E.4. Consider some input X ∈ RN partitioned into X 1 , . . . , X j as specified
by the proof of Proposition E.4 with chain-of-thought XCoT and hopk (X)N determined by some masked
transformer T .7 Suppose T has embeddings (Qh , Kh , Vh )h∈[H] and output MLP ψ. We provide an (NCoT + 1)-
round blackboard protocol to compute hopk (X)N from X.
   Suppose in the rth round of the protocol, all players know XCoT,1 , . . . , XCoT,r−1 and aim to compute
                         (
                           XCoT,r      if r ≤ NCoT
   T (X ◦ XCoT )N +r−1 =
                           hopk (X)N if r = NCoT + 1
                                               H PN +r−1
                                                                                                            !
                                              X              exp(QhN +r−1 (XN +r−1 )T Kih (Xi )T )Vih (Xi )
                       = ψN +r−1 XN +r−1 +            i=1
                                                        PN +r−1                                               .
                                              h=1          i=1   exp(QhN +r−1 (XN +r−1 )T Kih (Xi ))
  7We abuse notation to index X                            j
                               N +i = XCoT,i and let Xi ∈ X be true if i ∈ {2(k − j)q + 1, . . . , w(k − j + 1)q}.



                                                            35
If we let
                                            X
                             Sr,h,j =               exp(QhN +r−1 (XN +r−1 )T Kih (Xi )T )Vih (Xi ) ∈ Rm ,
                                          Xi ∈X j
                                          NX
                                           +r−1
                         Sr,h,CoT =                 exp(QhN +r−1 (XN +r−1 )T Kih (Xi )T )Vih (Xi ) ∈ Rm ,
                                          i=N +1
                                            X
                             Zr,h,j =               exp(QhN +r−1 (XN +r−1 )T Kih (Xi )T ) ∈ R,
                                          Xi ∈X j
                                          NX
                                           +r−1
                         Zr,h,CoT =                 exp(QhN +r−1 (XN +r−1 )T Kih (Xi )T ) ∈ R,
                                          i=N +1

then we observe that
                                                                                  Pk
                                                                                j=1 Sr,h,j + Sr,h,CoT
                                                                             H
                                                                                                             !
                                                                             X
                    T (X ◦ XCoT )N +r−1 = ψN +r−1                XN +r−1 +     Pk                                .
                                                                           h=1  j=1 Zr,h,j + Zr,h,CoT

Each player Pk computes (Sr,h,j , Zr,h,j )h∈[H] and writes them on the blackboard with O(mHp)-bit messages.
Since Sr,h,CoT and Zr,h,CoT are known by all players, every player can individually T (X ◦ XCoT )N +r−1 .
    By induction, all players know hopk (X)N after NCoT + 1 rounds. The claim now follows from Proposi-
tion E.4.

F       Proofs of low-level attention constructions
F.1     Hardmax simulation proof of Appendix A.1
Lemma A.2. Let f ∈ AttnN   m be a self-attention unit with precision p = Θ(log N ) and embedding functions
Q, K, V such that for some fixed 1 ≥ ξ = N −O(1) and every X ∈ RN ×m and i ∈ [N ]:
                                        A(X)i,i′ ≤ max
                                                    ′′
                                                       A(X)i,i′′ − ξ, ∀i′ ̸∈ Imax (A(X)i ),
                                                       i

where A(X) = Q(X)K(X) . Then there exists a self-attention unit f ′ ∈ AttnN
                                    T
                                                                          m with a valid p -bit implemen-
                                                                                          ′

tation with p = O(p) satisfying
             ′

                                f ′ (X) = hardmax(A(X))V (X).
                                                             ′
Proof. For some p′ = Θ(p + log 1ξ ) and c = Θ( p ξ+ζ · log N ) where ζ is as in Appendix A.1), let f ′ have query
embedding Q′ (X) = cQ(X) and identical key K and value V embeddings as f . Therefore, by construction,
these embeddings can be written with precision p′ = O(ln(c) + p) = O(log 1ξ + log log N + p) = O(p).
    Let fˆ′ be a valid p′ -bit implementation of f ′ , meaning that the two ∥fˆ′ − f ′ ∥∞ = O(1/2p+1 ) (thus fˆ′
rounds f ′ to p′ bits of precision), and fix some X. We first show that the softmax matrix is sufficiently close
to that of the hardmax and is also a valid p′ -bit implementation of the hardmax. Without loss of generality,
let 1 ∈ Imax (A(X)i ). First, note that
                     X                                       N                        1
                                    exp(cA(X)i,i′ ) ≤              exp(cA(X)i,1 ) = O(p′ +ζ) exp(cA(X)i,1 ).
                                                           exp(cξ)                 N
               i′ ̸∈Imax (A(X)i )

Then,
                                                                              1                exp(cA(X)i,1 )
            |softmax(cA(X))i,1 − hardmax(A(X))i,1 | =                                   − PN
                                                                    |Imax (A(X)i )|          i′ =1 exp(cA(X)i,i )
                                                                                                                 ′


                                                                                          exp(cA(X)         )
                                                                    P
                                                                       i′ ̸∈Imax (A(X)i )             i,i ′        1
                                                                  ≤                                           = Ω(p′ +ζ) .
                                                                     |Imax (A(X)i )| exp(cA(X)i,1 )            N


                                                                   36
Likewise, for any i′′ ̸∈ Imax (A(X)i ):
                                                               exp(cA(X)i,i′′ )        1
               |softmax(cA(X))i,i′′ − hardmax(A(X))i,i′′ | ≤ PN                    = Ω(p′ +ζ) .
                                                              i′ =1 exp(cA(X)i,i )
                                                                                ′   N
Therefore,
                                                √                                                               1
∥softmax(cA(X))i − hardmax(cA(X))i ∥2 ≤             N ·max |softmax(cA(X))i,i′′ − hardmax(cA(X))i,i′′ | =                 .
                                                       i′′
                                                                                                            N Ω(p′ +ζ)
                                                                                            ′
   We conclude that the approximation is sufficiently close, meaning it is O(1/2p ), whereby it is exact after
rounding:
 fˆ′ (X) − hardmax(Q(X)K(X)T )V (X)            ≤ f ′ (X) − hardmax(Q(X)K(X)T )V (X) ∞ + fˆ′ (X) − f ′ (X)
                                           ∞                                                                          ∞
                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                             
                                               ≤ max       softmax(cA(X))T
                                                                         i V (X)·,j − hardmax(A(X))i V (X)·,j
                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                        +O
                                                  i,j                                                          2 p′
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                            
                                               ≤ max softmax(cA(X))T i − hardmax(A(X))i 2 ∥V (X)·,j ∥2 + O
                                                                                       T
                                                  i,j                                                       2p′
                                                      1    √              1         1
                                                                                
                                               ≤ Ω(p′ +ζ) · N · N ζ + O       =O         .
                                                 N                       2p ′
                                                                                   2p′
Therefore, fˆ′ is a valid p′ -bit implementation of hardmax(Q(X)K(X)T )V (X).

F.2     Constructions for Appendix B.1
Proposition B.1. For any b ≤ N and d, there exists a self-attention unit sparsePropagateQ,d ∈ AttnN   m,p for
                                                                                                      m−Q−d
m = d+O(Q log N ) and p = O(log N ), which, given any input X with Xi = (zi , Si , 0) ∈ R × ≤Q ×{0}
                                                                                   ⃗           [N ]
                                                                                          d
                                                                                                    

such that bi = |{Sj ∋ i : j ∈ [N ]}| ≤ Q for all i, has output sparsePropagateQ,d (X) satisfying
                                                                  1 X
                                      sparsePropagateQ,d (X)i =         zj .
                                                                  bi
                                                                        Sj ∋i

Proof.√Following the proof of Theorem
                                  √ 2 of Sanford et al.
                                                     (2023), there exist p-bit precision vectors u1 , . . . , uN ∈
          m
{±1/ m} and wS with wS ≤ 2 Q for all S ∈ ≤Q       N
                                                       such that

                                        i wS = 1, for all i ∈ S
                                       uT
                                               1
                                        i wS ≤ , for all i ̸∈ S.
                                       uT
                                               2
We then design the embeddings of sparsePropagateQ,d with
                                          Q(X)i = (ui , 1),
                                                   (
                                                     (wSi , 0) if i > 0,
                                          K(X)i =
                                                     (⃗0, 34 ) if i = 0,
                                                   (
                                                     zi if i > 0,
                                          V (X)i =
                                                    ⃗0 if i = 0.

As a result,
                              i K(X)i′ = 1
                          Q(X)T                                            if i ∈ Si′ , i′ > 0,
                                         1
                          Q(X)T
                              i K(X)i′ ≤                                   if i ̸∈ Si′ , i′ > 0,
                                         2
                                         3
                          Q(X)i K(X)0 = .
                               T
                                         4



                                                            37
Hence, the largest inner products for query i correspond to i′ for all Si′ ∋ i if any exist, and 0 otherwise.
There exists a margin of at least 14 between the largest inner product in each row and all others. By applying
Lemma A.2, we conclude that there exists a self attention unit f ′ with embedding dimension p = Θ(log N )
that computes
                       f ′ (X) = hardmax(Q(X)K(X)T )V (X) = sparsePropagate(X).

F.3     Constructions for Appendix B.2
Lemma B.4. For any MPC protocol π with local memory s and q machines with nin -word inputs, there
                                       nin ,max(nin ,q)
exists a transformer init ∈ Transformers,1,1,d in ,dout
                                                        with din = 1 and dout = s, which, given Input ∈ Zn2p , has
output satisfying init(Input) = MachineIn .  (1)


Proof. Let M = max(nin , q) and Q, K, V : ZM    2p → R
                                                         M ×s
                                                                be the query, key, and value
                                                                                          embeddings of the
attention unit f in init, and let ψ : R M ×s
                                             → Z2p × [N ] be its output MLP. Let qin = nsin denote the number
                                                s

of machines used lto mstore the inputs.
                     ′
    Let Desti′ = is ∈ [qin ] denote the machine that stores the input token index i′ ∈ [nin ] in the MPC
protocol, and let
                                     Rcvdi = {(s − 1)i + 1, . . . , min(si, nin )}
                                                                         (1)
denote the set of all input tokens indices belonging to MachineIni for machine i ∈ [qin ].
   For each machine i ∈ [qin ], we define the query embedding as

                                         2πi           2πi                   2πi           2πi
                                                                                       
                     Q(Input)i = cos           , sin         , . . . , cos         , sin          .
                                          M            M                     M             M

Likewise, for each token index i′ ∈ [nin ], the key and value vectors are
                                    (                                 
                                       cos 2π·Dest  i′
                                                         , sin 2π·Dest i′
                                                                             if i′ ≤ nin , i′ ≡ ι           (mod s),
           K(Input)i′ ,(2ι−1,2ι) =              M                 M
                                     (0, 0)                                  otherwise,
                                    (
                                     (Inputi′ , i′ ) if i′ ≤ nin , i′ ≡ ι (mod s),
           V (Input)i′ ,(2ι−1,2ι) =
                                     (0, i′ )          otherwise.

These definitions guarantee that large inner products only occur between machine queries Q(Input)i and
                                                              (1)
tokens keys K(Input)i′ when Inputi′ is allocated to MachineIni . That is,

                             i K(Input)i′ = 1,
                     Q(Input)T                                                            if i′ ∈ Rcvdi
                                                            1
                                                                
                             i K(Input)i′ ≤ 1 − Ω
                     Q(Input)T                                       ,                       otherwise.
                                                            M2

By applying Lemma A.2 with ξ = Ω( N12 ), there exists some self-attention unit f ′ such that

                                                                               (Inputi′ , i′ )i′ ∈Rcvdi
                      f ′ (Input)i = hardmax(Q(Input)K(Input)T ) =                                      .
                                                                                    |Rcvdi |

A proper choice of ψ and an invocation of the definition of MachineIn(1) ensures that init(Input)i =
                         (1)
ψ(f (Input))i = MachineIni .

Lemma B.6. For any R-round MPC protocol π with local memory s and q machines with nout -word output,
                                              q,max(n ,q)
there exists a transformer final ∈ Transformers,1,1,din out
                                                        ,dout for din = s and dout = 1, which, given input
X = MachineIn , has output final(X) with final(X)i,1 = Outputi ∈ Z2p .
                (R)




                                                            38
Proof. This argument inverts that of Lemma B.4, after applying the LocalR to transform MachineIn(R) to
MachineOut(R) . Let Q, K, V : ZM  2p → R
                                         M ×s
                                              be the query, key, and value embeddings
                                                                                     of the only attention
unit f in final, and let ψ : R M ×s
                                    → Z2p × [N ] be its output MLP. Let qout = nout  denote the number of
                                       s
                                                                               
                                                                                 s
machines storing relevant information for the output of the MPC protocol.
   For each machine i′ ∈ [qout ], let

                                   Senti′ = {(s − 1)i′ + 1, . . . , min(si′ , nout )}

denote the set of all token indices receiving its output. Likewise, for each token index i ∈ [nout ], let Srci = ⌈i/s⌉
be the machine containing its relevant token. We define Q = Q′ ◦ LocalR , K = K ′ ◦ LocalR , V = V ′ ◦ LocalR
as follows.
                                          (                                     
                                                           i⌋                   i⌋
                                             cos 2π⌊Src         , sin 2π⌊Src              if i ≤ nout , i ≡ ι (mod s)
        Q (MachineOut )i,(2ι−1,2ι) =
         ′               (R)                           M                   M
                                            (0, 0)                                        otherwise.
                                                   2πi′
                                                                    2πi′
                                                                                           2πi′           2πi′
                                                                                                       
               K ′ (MachineOut(R) )i′ = cos               , sin            , . . . , cos          , sin           .
                                                    M                M                      M              M
                                                      (R)
               V ′ (MachineOut(R) )i′ = MsgOuti′ .

Applying Lemma A.2 as before yields
                                                          (
                                                                     (R)
                                                           MachineOuti′      if i ∈ Senti′ ,
                              f (MachineIn   (R)
                                                     )i =
                                                           0                 otherwise.

A properly chosen ψ ensures that final(MachineIn(R) )i = ψ(f (MachineIn(R) ))i = Outputi .

F.4     Constructions for Appendix D.1
Lemma D.1. For some m ≥ d + 2, τ : [N ] × Rm → [N ], and ρ : Rm → Rd , there exists an attention head
lookUpτ,ρ ∈ MaskAttnN
                    m with precision p = O(log N ) and m ≥ d + 2 satisfying lookUpτ,ρ (X)i,:d = ρ(Xτ (i,Xi ) ).

Proof. We let V (Xi ) = (ρ(Xi ), ⃗0) and define sinusoidal embeddings Q and K with

                                               2πτ (i, Xi )           2πτ (i, Xi ) ⃗
                                                                               
                            Q(X)i = cos                       , sin                ,0 ,
                                                   N                      N
                                               2πi           2πi) ⃗
                                                                 
                           K(X)i = cos               , sin            ,0 .
                                                N              N

Note that

                     i K(X)i′ = 1,
                 Q(X)T                                                                  if τ (i, Xi ) = i′ ,
                                            2π                  1
                                                                  
                     i K(X)i′ ≤ cos
                 Q(X)T                               =1−Ω                ,                     otherwise.
                                            N                   N2

   By applying Lemma A.2 with ξ = Ω( N12 ), we conclude that a satisfactory self-attention unit exists.

Lemma D.2. For any finite alphabet Σ, m ≥ d + 2, µ1 , µ2 : Rm → Σ, and ρ : Rm → Rd , there exists an
attention head lastOccurrenceµ,ρ ∈ MaskAttnN m with precision p = O(log(N |Σ|)) such that,
                                         (
                                           ρ(⃗0)   if ∀ i′ < i : µ1 (Xi′ ) ̸= µ2 (Xi ),
                 lastOccurrence(X)i,:d =
                                           ρ(Xi′ ) if i′ = max {i′ < i : µ1 (Xi′ ) = µ2 (Xi )} .




                                                             39
Proof. Let N ′ = N |Σ|. We define token embeddings as follows, including start token “dummy embeddings”
as discussed in Appendix A.1.

                                     2π(N µ2 (Xi ) + i)             2π(N µ2 (Xi ) + i)
                                                                                           
                    Q(X)i = cos                             , sin                        , 1, 0 ,
                                                                                              ⃗
                                            N |Σ|                        N |Σ|
                                     2π(N µ1 (Xi ) + i)             2π(N µ1 (Xi ) + i)
                                                                                           
                    K(X)i = cos                             , sin                        , 0, 0 ,
                                                                                              ⃗
                                            N |Σ|                        N |Σ|
                                           2π(N − 12 )
                                                      
                   K(X)0 = 0, 0, cos                    , ⃗0 ,
                                             N |Σ|
                    V (X)i = (ρ(Xi ), ⃗0),
                    V (X)0 = ⃗0.

Taken together, these embeddings provide the following characterization of the inner products (with causal
masking matrix Γ):

                                           2π(i − i′ )
                                                      
          Q(X)T 0 K(X) i′ + Γ i,i′ = cos                       if i ≥ i′ > 0, µ1 (Xi′ ) = µ2 (Xi ),
                                             N |Σ|
                                           2π
                                          
          Q(X)T i K(X) i′ + Γ i,i′ ≤ cos                       if i ≥ i′ > 0, µ1 (Xi′ ) ̸= µ2 (Xi ),
                                           N
               i K(X)i′ + Γi,i′ = −∞
           Q(X)T                                                                            if i < i′ ,
                                       2π(N − 21 )
                                                  
            Q(X)i K(X)i + Γi,0 = cos
                 T
                                                     .
                                         N |Σ|

As a result, the largest inner product Q(X)T
                                           i K(X)i′ for some i is the largest i with µ1 (Xi′ ) = µ2 (Xi ) if one
                                                                                 ′

exists and i = 0 otherwise. Furthermore, there exists a margin of Ω( N 2 |Σ|2 ) between this inner product and
            ′                                                           1

all others. We conclude by applying Lemma A.2.

G     Further empirical analysis of k-hop induction heads
This appendix presents in-depth explanations of the empirical results of Section 4.2, along with further
experiments. Taken together, these results suggest that the relationship between the number of hops k and
the depth L of transformers trained on the task is well-characterized by the representational thresholds of
Theorem 4.2 and Corollary 4.3; that the construction described in the proof of Theorem 4.2 is attainable by
trained models; and deep models likely exhibit an inductive bias that favors compositional learning rules in
the finite sample regime.
    We define our experimental methodology precisely in Appendix G.1 and provide supporting evidence for
our claims in the subsequent sections.
Exponential powers of depth. Our principal empirical claim is that incrementing the depth L of a
transformer exponentially increases the model’s capabilities to learn k-hop induction heads tasks. We explore
this claim primarily in Appendix G.2, where we compare this empirical claim with the relevant theoretical
results (Theorem 4.2 and Corollary 4.3), which suggest a similar dependence. We further study the impacts
of increasing the embedding dimension m of the transformer in Appendix G.3 and find that doubling the
width is roughly equivalent in performance to incrementing the depth by one.
Empirical Claim G.1. A transformer T ∈ MaskTransformerN          m,L,H trained with Adam to solve hopk has
small token-wise classification error if L log(m) = Ω(log k) and large error if L log m = O(log k).

Mechanistic alignment with theoretical construction. We further demonstrate the empirical salience
of our theoretical construction by conducting a study of the interpretability of learned transformers in
Appendix G.4. This investigation reveals that the attention matrices of sufficiently deep transformers exhibit


                                                      40
an implementation of a circuit that relies on the same “doubling” principle of the construction in the proof of
Theorem 4.2. The resulting circuit is comprised of the same intermediate products that are used in that hopk
construction.
Empirical Claim G.2. The outputs of individual attention matrices of a transformer T ∈ MaskTransformerNm,L,H
trained with Adam to solve hopk with L = Ω(log k) and evaluated on input X ∈ ΣN (i) correspond to the
findjX intermediate products of the Theorem 4.2 construction and (ii) demonstrate a “doubling” phenomenon
where the each head layer ℓ corresponds to findjX for some j = O(2ℓ ).
Beneficial inductive biases of depth. While most of our experiments belong to the “infinite-sample”
regime where new samples are randomly generated on each training step, we also evaluate our models in two
finite-sample regimes in Appendix G.5. We find that a small number of samples is sufficient to approach the
performance of the infinite-sample regime. When the amount of training data is small, we find that deeper
models perform better than shallower models, possibly due to an inductive bias that favors compositional
hypotheses.
Empirical Claim G.3. hopk can be learned in a sample-efficient manner by transformers T ∈ MaskTransformerN
                                                                                                         m,L,H
trained with Adam with L = Ω(log k). If T overfits to hopk tasks for some k, then increasing the depth L
while holding k fixed leads superior performance.
    The experiments detailed here were conducted under limited computational resources. The authors are
interested in future work that would evaluate whether these scaling rules persist on larger architectures and
more complex tasks.
G.1     Experimental details
Task details. We study a multi-task variant of k-hop induction heads that predicts hopk (X) = (0, hopk (X ′ ))
from input X = (k, X ′ ) for k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , kmax }8 and X ′ ∈ ΣN −1 . We refer to this task as multi-hop and
provide the task hyper-parameters in Table 1.

                                               Hyperparameter          Value
                                               Context length N        100
                                               Alphabet size |Σ|       4
                                               Max hops kmax           16

                                      Table 1: Multi-hop task hyper-parameters

    We define the distribution Dmulti−hop over labeled samples for the multi-hop task and DX over input
sequences X ∈ ΣN −1 . We draw a labeled sample (X, hopk (X)) ∼ Dmulti−hop by independently sampling
k ∼ Unif({0, 1, . . . , kmax }) and X ′ ∼ DX . Input sequences X ′ ∼ DX are drawn uniformly    from inputs with no
repeating elements. That is, we sample X1′ ∼ Unif(Σ) and each Xj+1    ′
                                                                           ∼ Unif(Σ \ Xj′ ). For each k ∈ [kmax ],
                                                                                      

let Dhopk denote the conditional distribution ((k ′ , X ′ ), (0, hopk′ (X ′ ))) ∼ Dmulti−hop | (k = k ′ ). Also, let
dom(hopk ) = {(k, X ′ ) : Pr [X ′ ∼ DX ] > 0}.
    For Σ := Σ ∪ [kmax ], we define the n-sample empirical token-wise classification error of a transformer
      N      N
T : Σ → Σ on a task hopk as
                                     n                              N
                                  1X                 1
                                                                       1 {T (X ι )i ̸= hopk (X ι )i ̸=⊥} ,
                                                                   X
                   errnk (T ) =
                                  n ι=1 | {i : hopk (X ι )i ̸=⊥} | i=1

for iid samples (X 1 , hopk (X 1 )), . . . , (X n , hopk (X n )) ∼ Dhopk . We ignore null ⊥ outputs of hopk when no
k-hop induction head exists in order to avoid inadvertently over-estimating the performance of transformers
on large k tasks, which have a large fraction of null outputs.
  8 The task hop is simply the identity mapping: hop (X ′ ) = X ′ .
                0                                   0



                                                             41
Training details. We trained a variety of causally-masked GPT-2 transformers (Radford et al., 2019) from
HuggingFace to solve the multi-hop task. The model has an absolute positional encoding.
    The transformers are trained with Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) on the cross-entropy loss. In the
infinite-sample regime, we draw 32 new iid samples from Dmulti−hop on each training step. Otherwise, ntrain
samples are drawn before training commences and all samples are rotated through batches, before repeating.
We use the hyper-parameters in Table 2 to train all of the models identified in Table 3.

                                  Hyperparameter             Value
                                  Embedding dimension m      {128, 256}
                                  Depth L                    {2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
                                  Number of heads H          {4, 8}
                                  Vocabulary size            30
                                  Activation function        GeLU
                                  Layer norm ϵ               10 −5

                                  Training samples ntrain     10 , 3 · 103 , ∞
                                                              3

                                  Learning rate              10−4
                                  Training steps             105
                                  Batch size                 32

                                 Table 2: Model and training hyper-parameters


 Identifier     Heads H     Embedding dimension m      Depth L    Training samples ntrain   Total parameters
      ∞
    T4,2                4                        128          2                       ∞              413,440
      ∞
    T4,3                4                        128          3                       ∞              611,712
      ∞
    T4,4                4                        128          4                       ∞              809,984
      ∞
    T4,5                4                        128          5                       ∞            1,008,256
      ∞
    T4,6                4                        128          6                       ∞            1,206,528
      ∞
    T8,2                8                        256          2                       ∞            1,613,312
      ∞
    T8,3                8                        256          3                       ∞            2,403,072
      ∞
    T8,4                8                        256          4                       ∞            3,192,832
      ∞
    T8,5                8                        256          5                       ∞            3,982,592
      ∞
    T8,6                8                        256          6                       ∞            4,772,352
     3000
   T4,2                 4                        128          2                     3000             413,440
     3000
   T4,3                 4                        128          3                     3000             611,712
     3000
   T4,4                 4                        128          4                     3000             809,984
     3000
   T4,5                 4                        128          5                     3000           1,008,256
     3000
   T4,6                 4                        128          6                     3000           1,206,528
     1000
   T4,2                 4                        128          2                     1000             413,440
     1000
   T4,3                 4                        128          3                     1000             611,712
     1000
   T4,4                 4                        128          4                     1000             809,984
     1000
   T4,5                 4                        128          5                     1000           1,008,256
     1000
   T4,6                 4                        128          6                     1000           1,206,528

            Table 3: Hyper-parameters of all MaskTransformerN
                                                            m,L,H trained for the empirical analysis.


Computational resources. All experiments were run on a 2021 Macbook Pro with an M1 chip.




                                                       42
G.2                   Exponential increases in k-hop capacity with depth (Empirical Claim G.1;
                      Figures 6 to 8)

                                     Evaluation of L-depth, 4-headed, infinite-sample intransformers on hopk
                               L=2
                     0.7       L=3
                               L=4
                               L=5
                     0.6       L=6

                     0.5
   Error: errkn(T)




                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                     0.0
                           1                   2                         4                      8              16
                                                                         k

Figure 6: Zoomed in version of Figure 2. Evaluation of transformers errnk (T4,L
                                                                            ∞
                                                                                ) with depths L ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6},
heads H = 4, and embedding dimension m = 128 trained on the multi-hop task. This figure plots errnk (T4,L     ∞
                                                                                                                 )
on n = 100 samples as a function of k for each choice of L.

    We visualize the relationship between the depth L of a transformer and the largest k such that errnk (T )
is small in Figure 6, Figure 7, and Figure 8. We exhibit the relationship in its simplest form by considering
transformers with heads H = 4, embedding dimension m = 128, and new training samples on every epoch.
The figures provide alternate views of errnk (T4,L
                                                 ∞
                                                    ) for each L ∈ {2, 3, 4, 5, 6} with n = 100 samples for each
k ∈ [kmax ].
    Together, these plots illustrate a sharp phase transition when D = ⌊log2 k⌋ + 2, which identically matches
the depth scaling in Theorem 4.2. Increasing the depth of a transformer by one approximately doubles
the number of values k ∈ [kmax ] with bounded error. For instance, following the theoretical and empirical
intuition of Bietti et al. (2023), the depth L = 2 transformer T4,2
                                                                  ∞
                                                                     succeeds in solving the standard induction
heads task, but attains at least 10% error on all other tasks. Likewise, a depth L = 3 model has error bounded
by 1% for k ∈ {1, 2}, which increases rapidly for larger values of k.
    This doubling phenomenon suggests that simple compositional tasks with a larger number of compositions
than the depth of the model are easily learnable if the model can employ a doubling trick, similar to the one
used in the proof of Theorem 4.2. This relationship between compositionality and depth reflects the results
of Zhang et al. (2023), where the learnable task complexity also scales super-linearly in depth.
    Given the lower bounds of Corollary 4.3, one may ask why models with depth L < ⌊log2 k⌋ achieve
non-trivial success on hopk tasks that cannot be represented in a compositional manner. There are several
relevant explanations:
  1. In these experiments, the embedding dimension m = 128 is actually larger than the context N = 100,
     which may enable the model to memorize more of its preceding samples and offload logical work to the
     MLP, rather than executing a pointer-doubling strategy. While practical models regularly have the
     opposite (and our theoretical results are oriented around that parametric scaling), we used a larger



                                                                    43
                                   Evaluation of L-Depth, 4-headed, infinite-sample transformers on hopk
                                                                                                           k=1
                     0.7                                                                                   k=2
                                                                                                           k=3
                                                                                                           k=4
                     0.6                                                                                   k=5
                                                                                                           k=6
                                                                                                           k=7
                     0.5                                                                                   k=8
                                                                                                           k=9
   Error: errkn(T)




                                                                                                           k = 10
                     0.4                                                                                   k = 11
                                                                                                           k = 12
                     0.3                                                                                   k = 13
                                                                                                           k = 14
                                                                                                           k = 15
                     0.2                                                                                   k = 16

                     0.1

                     0.0
                           2                3                       4                        5              6
                                                                  Depth L

              Figure 7: Alternate view of Figure 6 including errnk (T4,L
                                                                     ∞
                                                                         ) plotted as a function of L for each k.


             m than is necessary for representational purpose to improve the optimization landscape and speed
             convergence.
  2. This is made further plausible by the small alphabet size |Σ| and randomly drawn sequences X ′ , which
     place effective bounds on how much look-back from each token i is necessary to compute hopk (X)i .

    Nonetheless, these results provide strong support that models are substantially easier to train to low
classification error in the regime where the depth is sufficient to implement a pointer-doubling construction.
In the following subsection, we further investigate this phenomenon by examining the intermediate attention
matrices produced by trained models.




                                                                 44
                                                                                                                0.7
                  0.01 0.14 0.35 0.42 0.54 0.59 0.62 0.66 0.69 0.69 0.71 0.72 0.73 0.73 0.74 0.74


           2
                                                                                                                0.6
                  0.003 0.008 0.048 0.15 0.28 0.36 0.42 0.46 0.52 0.57 0.6 0.64 0.67 0.67 0.69 0.71             0.5
           3
                                                                                                                0.4
        Depth L

                  0.001 0.003 0.005 0.015 0.034 0.062 0.11 0.22 0.28 0.36 0.4 0.47 0.53 0.53 0.58 0.61
          4


                                                                                                                0.3
                  0.001 0.001 0.001 0.003 0.012 0.015 0.017 0.037 0.058 0.1 0.15 0.22 0.28 0.34 0.38 0.41       0.2
           5




                   0     0 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.003 0.007 0.006 0.007 0.01 0.011 0.012 0.021 0.027 0.035 0.062   0.1
           6




                                                                                                                0.0
                   1     2    3     4     5     6    7     8       9    10   11   12    13   14    15    16
                                                               k

  Figure 8: Alternate views of Figure 6 including errnk (T4,L
                                                          ∞
                                                              ) as a table with one cell for each (L, k) pair.


G.3     Width variation (Empirical Claim G.1; Figure 9)
While the primary focus of these empirical results and the paper as a whole is on the role of depth in the
ability of transformer to learn parallelizable and compositional tasks, we also aim to understand the interplay
of depth and width in learning the multi-hop task. Here, we contrast the previous transformers T4,L    ∞
                                                                                                          with
models T8,L∞
               that have more heads (H = 8) and larger embedding dimensions (m = 256). We plot the
classification errors of all 10 architectures over 16 hopk sub-tasks in Figure 9.
    Here, we observe a rough correspondence in performance between the transformers TH,L  ∞
                                                                                              and T2H,L−1 and
the same doubling phenomenon as is evident models with H = 4 heads. That is, while increasing the width
improves the classification error of learned models, it does so in a far less parameter-efficient manner than
incrementing the depth. As mentioned before, the relative success of wide and shallow transformers is likely
contingent on the relatively short context length N and alphabet size |Σ|. However, these results still suggest
an important role for wider models to play beyond representational capabilities of transformers.




                                                                   45
                                              Evaluation of L-depth, H-headed, infinite-sample intransformers on hopk
                               L = 2, H = 4
                     0.7       L = 2, H = 8
                               L = 3, H = 4
                               L = 3, H = 8
                     0.6       L = 4, H = 4
                               L = 4, H = 8
                               L = 5, H = 4
                     0.5       L = 5, H = 8
                               L = 6, H = 4
   Error: errkn(T)




                     0.4       L = 6, H = 8

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                     0.0
                           1                            2                         4                      8              16
                                                                                  k

Figure 9: Comparison between the errors errnk (TH,L
                                                ∞
                                                    ) of transformers with embedding dimension and heads
(m, H) = (4, 128) (dashed line, same plots as Figure 6) and (m, H) = (8, 256) (solid line) trained on the
multi-hop task, evaluated on n = 100 samples per hopk task.




                                                                             46
G.4     Mechanistic alignment with theoretical construction (Empirical Claim G.2,
        Figures 10 to 15)
We use standard attention-based interpretability techniques to better understand what particular logical
circuits are implemented by transformers trained to solve the multi-hop task. By qualitatively inspecting
the attention matrices produced by trained models and by measuring the alignment between those inner
products and partial solutions findj of hopk , we uncover a striking correspondence between the behaviors
of the trained models and the transformer construction designed in the proof of Theorem 4.2. We further
observe that trained transformers with high accuracy have “decisive” self-attention units with particularly
strong correlations to some findj intermediate, while poorly performing models have less predictable attention
activations.
    For a fixed trained model T ∈ TransformerNm,L,H , we let A
                                                               ℓ,h
                                                                   [T ](X) represent the output of the hth self-self
attention matrix in the ℓth layer for h ∈ [H] and ℓ ∈ [L], evaluated at some input X ∈ dom(hopk ). That is,
we let
                        Aℓ,h [T ](X) = softmax Qℓ,h (X ℓ−1 )K ℓ,h (X ℓ−1 )T + Γ ∈ RN ×N ,
                                                                                

where X ℓ−1 is the intermediate state representing the output of layer ℓ − 1 of T on input X and Γ is the
causal masking matrix. Each row i in the matrix represents the coefficients of the convex combination of
value vectors affiliated with each query, which can be used as a signifier of which embeddings i receives
information from.
Visualization of findj alignment for hop16 and depth L = 6 (Figure 10). The outputs of self-attention
matrices are often highly structured matrices that reveal which relationships between tokens are encoded and
how information is shared within the model (Li and McClelland, 2022; Clark et al., 2019; Rogers et al., 2021).
We plot several self-attention matrices associated with a depth L = 6, heads H = 4 transformer trained in
the infinite-sample regime and evaluated on a single sample X ∈ dom(hop16 ) in Figure 10.
    By looking at the six self-attention matrices, one can infer that all heads are “decisive” and obtain nearly
all of their relevant information from a single value embedding, rather than averages of a large number
of embeddings. The top-left self-attention matrix, which belongs to the first self-attention head, clearly
associates elements with their predecessors, which is identical the to the function of our lookUp attention
head in the first layer of the hopk construction of Theorem 4.2.
    While the roles of the other heads are not immediately obvious, they can be understood by overlaying
colored matrices with non-zero cells at (i, findjX (i)) for some j ≤ k. For instance, the top-right attention matrix
in layer ℓ = 2 corresponds almost exactly with find1X (as suggested by the second-layer of our construction),
and the others are closely associated with find1X , find2X , find3X , and find8X for layers ℓ = 3, 4, 5, 6 respectively.
This is a remarkably close correspondence to our construction, which includes a self-attention matrix in the
                                                    ℓ−2
ℓth layer whose activations correspond to find2X .
    While not conclusive, this experiment suggests a strong alignment between the behaviors of this particular
transformer and our theoretical construction. This suggests a high likelihood that the transformer successfully
learns to solve hop16 by employing a pointer-doubling primitive. However, these results apply to only a single
model, a single task, and a single input; in the subsequent section, we generalize this interpretability analysis.
Alignment between attention heads and findj for a single hopk sub-task (Figures 11 to 13). To
broaden and quantify the analysis of the previous section, we measure the extent to which each self-attention
head mimics the functionality of findj , which are partial computations of hopk that are employed in the proof
of Theorem 4.2. We use cell-wise matrix inner products to quantify the strength of correlation between a
self-attention matrix and a fixed function potentially relevant to interpretability.
    For two matrices A, B ∈ RN ×N , let
                                                                     2
                                                           ∥A ⊙ B∥F
                                               ⟨A, B⟩ =
                                                          ∥A∥F ∥B∥F

be their normalized element-wise inner-product, where ∥·∥F is the Frobenius norm and ⊙ denotes element-wise



                                                          47
                                        Self-attention matrix A , h[T4, 6](X), X dom(hop16)
                     = 1, h = 1, find0X highlighted                                = 2, h = 4, find1X highlighted




                     = 3, h = 2, find1X highlighted                                = 4, h = 2, find2X highlighted




                     = 5, h = 3, find3X highlighted                                = 6, h = 1, find8X highlighted




Figure 10: The outputs of several internal self-attention matrices Aℓ,h [T4,6    ∞
                                                                                   ](X) ∈ R100×100 of a trained
multi-task transformer of depth D = 6 evaluated on a single sample X ∼ Dhop16 are plotted in grayscale. In
each cell, the matrix with non-zero entries (findjX (i), i)i∈[N ] for some j is included in transparent color to
visualize the function of each self-attention unit.
                                                                 48
multiplication. For some function g : [N ] → {0} ∪ [N ], we let ⟨g, B⟩ := ⟨Ag , B⟩, where
                                                   (
                                                     1 if g(j) = i,
                                           Agi,j =
                                                     0 otherwise.

    We use this notation to analyze experimentally how closely the self-attention matrices Aℓ,h encode the
intermediate products of the proof of Theorem 4.2, findjX . For n iid samples X 1 , . . . , X n ∈∼ Dhopk , let
                                                                n
                                                             1 XD                        E
                                       Aℓ,h , findj n,k :=         findjX ι , Aℓ,h (X ι ) .
                                                             n ι=1

Due to the non-negativity of Aℓ,h and findj , Aℓ,h , findj n,k ∈ [0, 1], and Aℓ,h , findj n,k = 1 only if ∀ι ∈ [n]:

                                         Aℓ,h (X ι )i,i′ = 1 ⇐⇒ findjX ι (i) = i′ .

    These inner products make it possible to visualize the strength of correlations of all heads in a particular
model T ∈ MaskTransformerN    m,L,H with all target functions find on a collection of random samples drawn
                                                                       j

from some Dhopk . Figure 11 visualizes the functionality of all attention units in the 4-layer, 4-head transformer
  ∞
T4,4  when evaluated on the sub-task hop4 . The figure gives several clues about how hop4 is successfully
computed by the trained model: the second layer and third layer both utilize find1 to determined find2 jointly
by the end of the third layer. The fourth layer uses the ability to create a stable find2 construction to obtain
find4 and hence hop4 .
    This plot also indicates the relative stability of this circuit interpretation of the procedure: a large number
of heads are very strongly correlated with find1 or find2 across the 10 samples, which indicates they are likely
utilized consistently to compute those intermediates regardless of input.
    Figure 12 is a similar plot for the transformer T4,6 ∞
                                                             with depth L = 6, evaluated on the task hop16 . The
functionalities of the heads visualized in Figure 10 can be observed in the corresponding inner products. The
collection of all inner products presents further evidence that the pointer-doubling phenomenon occurs in the
trained models, due to the increase in compositions present in the largest inner products of deeper attention
units.
    While Figures 11 and 12 showcase the decisive alignment between self-attention heads and particular
partial computations findj in successfully trained models, Figure 13 demonstrates the loss of that decisiveness
in poorly performing transformers. There, we visualize the alignments of the trained depth-4 transformer
  ∞
T4,4  evaluated on hop16 , in which it attains a 61% token error. While a self-attention units in the second
layer coincides with find1 , no strong correlations emerge deeper in the model. Unlike the other figures, the
deeper self-attention units are “indecisive,” lacking any large inner products and failing in particular to
correlate with any highly compositional targets. This provides a visual explanation of the transformer’s
failure, since it lacked the effective representational capacity needed to learn a circuit with consistent and
highly-compositional outputs.9
Alignment between attention heads and findj for all hopk sub-tasks (Figures 14 and 15). For
an even more global lens on the mechanistic interpretability of these trained models, we visualize how the
maximum inner products of each self-attention unit change for a fixed transformer for different sub-tasks
hopk . Figures 14 and 15 do so for the depth-4 and depth-6 networks respectively. The hue of each cell (and its
numerical label) corresponds to the j ∗ with the most correlated inner product with corresponding attention
unit Aℓ,h in samples from dom(hopk ), and the opacity corresponds to the magnitude of that inner product.
    The takeaways of the previous inner product figures are apparent in these: the approximate doubling
for the depth L = 6 transformer can be visualized by the vertically changing opaque colors. Conversely, a
   9 Since these experiments are in the small alphabet size |Σ| = 4 regime, this task performs better than random guessing due to

inferential capabilities that are are powered by the high embedding dimension and do not require implementing a pointer-chasing
algorithm. We suspect that the “checkerboard” patterns are powered by this inference.



                                                               49
                                                        A , h, findj n, 4 for depth-4 transformer and X dom(hop4)                     1.0
                            = 1, h = 1   0.32

                            = 1, h = 2   0.17 0.1 0.01 0.01

                            = 1, h = 3   0.32
                                                                                                                                      0.8
                            = 1, h = 4   0.32 0.15 0.08 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01

                            = 2, h = 1   0.04 0.19 0.08 0.08 0.04 0.03 0.01 0.01

                            = 2, h = 2   0.93

                            = 2, h = 3   0.77 0.05 0.11 0.02 0.02                                                                     0.6
           Layer , head h




                            = 2, h = 4   0.52 0.04 0.14 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 3, h = 1          0.8           0.07

                            = 3, h = 2   0.94          0.01                                                                           0.4
                            = 3, h = 3   0.19 0.18 0.15 0.08 0.05 0.02 0.01

                            = 3, h = 4   0.23 0.09 0.15 0.05 0.04 0.02 0.01

                            = 4, h = 1   0.18          0.77          0.03
                                                                                                                                      0.2
                            = 4, h = 2          0.8           0.17          0.01

                            = 4, h = 3   0.93          0.01

                            = 4, h = 4          0.87          0.04
                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                          1      2      3      4      5      6     7   8       9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                           j

Figure 11: Plots of all inner products Aℓ,h [T4,4
                                              ∞
                                                  ], findj 10,4 for n = 10 samples X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hop4 ) for
the 4-layer transformer T4,4 .
                           ∞




separation can be observed between the tasks where the depth L = 4 transformer performs well and has
“decisive” self-attention units deeper in the network and those where it does not.
   Moreover, the figures (especially Figure 15) demonstrate that several self-attention units have a consistent
function among samples from the same task, while adapting in function to different hopk tasks. This is most
apparent in head h = 4 of layer ℓ = 6, where the self-attention head functions as find1 , find3 , find5 or find7
depending on the complexity of the task.




                                                                                       50
                                                   A , h, findj n, 16 for depth-6 transformer and X dom(hop16)              1.0
                            = 1, h = 1   0.33
                            = 1, h = 2   0.33 0.16 0.09 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01
                            = 1, h = 3   0.34 0.01
                            = 1, h = 4   0.32
                            = 2, h = 1   0.24 0.08 0.05 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01                   0.8
                            = 2, h = 2   0.88      0.06        0.01
                            = 2, h = 3   0.08 0.22 0.06 0.06 0.02 0.01 0.01
                            = 2, h = 4   0.92      0.01
                            = 3, h = 1   0.93
                            = 3, h = 2   0.93                                                                               0.6
                            = 3, h = 3
           Layer , head h




                                         0.26 0.06 0.07 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.02
                            = 3, h = 4   0.21 0.14 0.13 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.01                                0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 4, h = 1   0.93
                            = 4, h = 2         0.9
                            = 4, h = 3   0.14 0.11 0.08 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01    0.4
                            = 4, h = 4   0.07      0.79        0.06
                            = 5, h = 1   0.93
                            = 5, h = 2             0.04        0.81         0.04
                            = 5, h = 3   0.03      0.89        0.01
                            = 5, h = 4   0.02       0.9        0.01                                                         0.2
                            = 6, h = 1   0.02                         0.07       0.77      0.03
                            = 6, h = 2   0.02 0.01                          0.12 0.01 0.65      0.04
                            = 6, h = 3   0.03 0.01 0.14        0.74         0.13
                            = 6, h = 4   0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.04           0.82      0.02
                                                                                                                            0.0
                                          1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8       9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                 j

Figure 12: Plots of all inner products Aℓ,h [T4,6
                                              ∞
                                                  ], findj 10,16 for n = 10 samples X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hop16 )
for the 6-layer transformer T4,6 .
                              ∞




                                                                              51
                                                       A , h, findj n, 16 for depth-4 transformer and X dom(hop16)                                   1.0
                            = 1, h = 1   0.32

                            = 1, h = 2   0.23 0.13 0.01 0.01

                            = 1, h = 3   0.33
                                                                                                                                                     0.8
                            = 1, h = 4   0.21 0.09 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 2, h = 1   0.04 0.22 0.1 0.11 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01

                            = 2, h = 2   0.92          0.02

                            = 2, h = 3   0.64 0.05 0.19 0.03 0.05 0.01 0.01 0.01                                                                     0.6
           Layer , head h




                            = 2, h = 4   0.51 0.05 0.17 0.05 0.07 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 3, h = 1          0.46          0.29          0.08          0.01

                            = 3, h = 2   0.68          0.21          0.06          0.01                                                              0.4
                            = 3, h = 3   0.05 0.06 0.15 0.08 0.15 0.07 0.09 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01

                            = 3, h = 4   0.11 0.12 0.1 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01

                            = 4, h = 1   0.02          0.14          0.25          0.21              0.1         0.03          0.01
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                            = 4, h = 2   0.01 0.01 0.01 0.07 0.01 0.16 0.02 0.17 0.03 0.11 0.02 0.05 0.01 0.02

                            = 4, h = 3   0.61          0.32          0.11          0.03              0.01

                            = 4, h = 4   0.01 0.03            0.21          0.31 0.01 0.17 0.01 0.06                    0.01
                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                          1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8          9     10   11     12     13     14   15   16
                                                                                                 j

Figure 13: Plots of all inner products Aℓ,h [T4,4
                                              ∞
                                                  ], findj 10,16 for n = 10 samples X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hop16 )
for the 4-layer transformer T4,4 .
                              ∞




                                                                                            52
                                                    argmaxj A , h, findj n, k for depth-4 transformer and X dom(hopk)
                     = 1, h = 1    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 1, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 1, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 1, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                                                                                                                                         j
                     = 2, h = 1    2     2     2        2     2     2     2       2      2        2   2   2    2        2   2   2    1
                                                                                                                                     2
                     = 2, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    3
                                                                                                                                     4
                     = 2, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    5
                                                                                                                                     6
    Layer , head h




                                                                                                                                     7
                     = 2, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    8
                                                                                                                                     9
                     = 3, h = 1    2     2     2        2     2     2     2       2      2        2   2   2    2        2   2   2   10
                                                                                                                                    11
                     = 3, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1   12
                                                                                                                                    13
                     = 3, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     3     3       3      3        3   3   3    3        3   3   5   14
                                                                                                                                    15
                     = 3, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        2   2   2   16

                     = 4, h = 1    1     1     1        3     3     3     3       3      3        5   5   5    5        5   5   5
                     = 4, h = 2    1     2     3        2     3     4     5       4      5        6   7   6    7        6   7   8
                     = 4, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 4, h = 4    2     2     2        2     2     2     4       4      4        4   6   4    6        6   6   6
                                                                                              12 )
                                   0)

                                         0)

                                               1)

                                                       1)

                                                              3)

                                                                    5)

                                                                          9)

                                                                                 7)

                                                                                         1)


                                                                                              11 )



                                                                                              13 )

                                                                                              14 )

                                                                                              15 )

                                                                                              16 )
                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                    27
                                                                                                    26



                                                                                                    30

                                                                                                    33

                                                                                                    32

                                                                                                    32

                                                                                                    32
                                  0.0

                                        0.0

                                              0.0

                                                     0.0

                                                            0.0

                                                                   0.0

                                                                         0.0

                                                                               0.1

                                                                                      0.2



                                                                                                (0.
                                                                                                (0.



                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.
                                  1(

                                        2(

                                              3(

                                                    4(

                                                            5(

                                                                  6(

                                                                         7(

                                                                               8(

                                                                                      9(

                                                                                             10




                                                                           k (Error errkn(T5,n 5))

Figure 14: Plots of all the maximum inner products Aℓ,h [T4,4        ∞
                                                                        ], findj n,k for n = 10 fixed samples
X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hopk ) for each k ∈ [16] for the 4-layer transformer T4,4 ∞
                                                                                     . The hue corresponds to
the index of the largest inner product j = arg maxj A [T4,4 ], find n,k , while the opacity is determined by
                                          ∗               ℓ,h  ∞      j

the magnitude of the correlation.




                                                                                 53
                                                    argmaxj A , h, findj n, k for depth-6 transformer and X dom(hopk)
                     = 1, h = 1    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 1, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 1, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 1, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 2, h = 1    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1
                     = 2, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1        j
                     = 2, h = 3    2     2     2        2     2     2     2       2      2        2   2   2    2        2   2   2    1
                     = 2, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    2
                                                                                                                                     3
                     = 3, h = 1    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    4
                     = 3, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    5
                     = 3, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    6
    Layer , head h




                                                                                                                                     7
                     = 3, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    8
                     = 4, h = 1    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1    9
                                                                                                                                    10
                     = 4, h = 2    2     2     2        2     2     2     2       2      2        2   2   2    2        2   2   2   11
                     = 4, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1   12
                                                                                                                                    13
                     = 4, h = 4    3     2     1        3     3     3     3       3      3        3   3   3    3        3   3   3   14
                     = 5, h = 1    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        1   1   1    1        1   1   1   15
                                                                                                                                    16
                     = 5, h = 2    1     1     1        1     1     3     3       3      3        3   3   5    5        5   5   5
                     = 5, h = 3    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        3   3   3    3        3   3   3
                     = 5, h = 4    1     1     1        1     1     1     1       3      3        3   3   3    3        3   3   3
                     = 6, h = 1    1     2     1        2     3     2     3       4      5        4   5   6    7        6   7   8
                     = 6, h = 2    2     1     2        3     2     3     4       5      4        5   6   7    6        7   8   9
                     = 6, h = 3    2     1     1        1     1     1     1       1      1        3   3   3    3        5   5   5
                     = 6, h = 4    2     1     1        1     1     3     3       3      3        5   5   5    5        7   7   7
                                                                                              12 )
                                   0)

                                         0)

                                               0)

                                                       0)

                                                              0)

                                                                    0)

                                                                          1)

                                                                                 0)

                                                                                         1)


                                                                                              11 )



                                                                                              13 )

                                                                                              14 )

                                                                                              15 )

                                                                                              16 )
                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                    01
                                                                                                   01



                                                                                                   01

                                                                                                   01

                                                                                                   02

                                                                                                   02

                                                                                                   03
                                  0.0

                                        0.0

                                              0.0

                                                     0.0

                                                            0.0

                                                                   0.0

                                                                         0.0

                                                                               0.0

                                                                                      0.0



                                                                                                (0.
                                                                                                (0.



                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.

                                                                                                (0.
                                  1(

                                        2(

                                              3(

                                                    4(

                                                            5(

                                                                  6(

                                                                         7(

                                                                               8(

                                                                                      9(

                                                                                             10




                                                                           k (Error errkn(T5,n 7))

Figure 15: Plots of all the maximum inner products Aℓ,h [T4,6             ∞
                                                                            ], findj n,k for n = 10 fixed samples
X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hopk ) for each k ∈ [16] for the 6-layer transformer T4,6∞
                                                                                    .




                                                                                 54
G.5     Finite-sample experiments (Empirical Claim G.3; Figures 16 to 19)
While most of our multi-hop experiments reside in the infinite-sample regime (where new samples are
generated for every batch), we also trained several transformers on ntrain ∈ {1000, 3000} samples to evaluate
whether generalization is possible in this domain, especially when the number of model parameters far exceeds
the number of training samples. The two training set sizes expose a sharp threshold between two different
generalization modes: low accuracy due to overfitting for most models on most tasks when ntrain = 1000 and
high accuracy approaching the infinite-sample regime when ntrain = 3000.
    Figure 16 compares the infinite-sample transformers T4,L ∞
                                                                with the 3000-sample models T4,L
                                                                                             3000
                                                                                                  . 3000 training
samples are sufficient to obtain comparable (if slightly worse) generalization error rates across model depths
L and task complexities k. This supports a hypothesis that the existence of a small transformer that perfectly
fits the data enables larger transformers to actually realize such architectures in the over-parameterized
regime.
    On the other hand, Figure 17 demonstrates that transformers trained on ntrain = 1000 samples suffer
poor performance on most tasks due to overfitting. While all models perform poorly on hopk sub-tasks for
large k, a depth-separation exists for simpler sub-tasks like hop3 . This suggests a positive inductive bias of
deep transformers for simple compositional decision rules, which enables far better performance than other
models in the overfitting regime.
    To investigate this gap in performance, we contrast the self-attention inner products of depth-4 T4,4
                                                                                                        1000
                                                                                                             and
depth-6 T4,6 on the task hop3 in Figures 18 and 19. The 6-layer model obtains a far superior classification
           1000

error on the sub-task, and the interpretability plot establishes a plausible circuit it implements: It uses
self-attention heads with find1 functionality consecutively in layers 4, 5, and 6, which enables the robust
retrieval of find3 and hop3 . On the other hand, the 4-layer plot exhibits poor performance and only has two
layers with find1 functionality; this justifies the relatively strong performance of T4,4
                                                                                      1000
                                                                                           on hop2 and its poor
performance on hop3 .
    While neither model learns any kind of pointer-doubling construction, the 6-layer model is still able to
learn a simple construction of hop3 that the 4-layer model misses. The representational suitability of deeper
models to compositional reasoning may thus provide a favorable inductive bias for learning the task in a
setting with little data.




                                                       55
                                                 Evaluation of L-depth, 4-headed, 3000-sample intransformers on hopk
                               L = 2, n = 3000
                               L = 2, n =
                     0.7       L = 3, n = 3000
                               L = 3, n =
                     0.6       L = 4, n = 3000
                               L = 4, n =
                               L = 5, n = 3000
                     0.5       L = 5, n =
                               L = 6, n = 3000
   Error: errkn(T)




                               L = 6, n =
                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                     0.0
                           1                             2                         4                      8            16
                                                                                   k

Figure 16: Comparison between the errors errnk (T4,Ln
                                                      ) of transformers trained in the infinite sample regime
(dashed line) and on ntrain = 3000 samples (solid line) on the multi-hop task, evaluated on n = 100 samples
per hopk task.



                                                 Evaluation of L-depth, 4-headed, 1000-sample intransformers on hopk
                     0.8       L = 2, n = 1000
                               L = 2, n =
                     0.7       L = 3, n = 1000
                               L = 3, n =
                               L = 4, n = 1000
                     0.6       L = 4, n =
                               L = 5, n = 1000
                     0.5       L = 5, n =
                               L = 6, n = 1000
   Error: errkn(T)




                               L = 6, n =
                     0.4

                     0.3

                     0.2

                     0.1

                     0.0
                           1                             2                         4                      8            16
                                                                                   k

Figure 17: Comparison between the errors errnk (T4,Ln
                                                      ) of transformers trained in the infinite sample regime
(dashed line) and on ntrain = 1000 samples (solid line) on the multi-hop task, evaluated on n = 100 samples
per hopk task.



                                                                              56
                                    A , h, findj n, 3 for depth-4 transformer and X dom(hop3), trained on ntr = 1000 samples   1.0
                            = 1, h = 1   0.15 0.09 0.1 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02

                            = 1, h = 2   0.31 0.06 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 1, h = 3   0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                                                                                                                               0.8
                            = 1, h = 4   0.32 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 2, h = 1   0.22 0.1 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 2, h = 2   0.09 0.12 0.07 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03

                            = 2, h = 3   0.28 0.11 0.12 0.08 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02       0.6
           Layer , head h




                            = 2, h = 4   0.31 0.13 0.11 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 3, h = 1   0.19 0.13 0.12 0.09 0.07 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 3, h = 2   0.05 0.2 0.06 0.07 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01                                      0.4
                            = 3, h = 3   0.88       0.06       0.01

                            = 3, h = 4   0.86       0.07       0.01

                            = 4, h = 1   0.85       0.09       0.01
                                                                                                                               0.2
                            = 4, h = 2   0.61 0.04 0.12 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.01

                            = 4, h = 3   0.33 0.06 0.17 0.06 0.08 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01

                            = 4, h = 4   0.03 0.4 0.02 0.09 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.01
                                                                                                                               0.0
                                          1     2    3     4    5     6   7   8       9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                  j

Figure 18: Plots of all inner products Aℓ,h [T4,4
                                              1000
                                                   ], findj 10,3 for n = 10 samples X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hop3 )
for the 4-layer transformer T4,4
                              1000
                                   .




                                                                              57
                                    A , h, findj n, 3 for depth-6 transformer and X dom(hop3), trained on ntr = 1000 samples   1.0
                            = 1, h = 1   0.33 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 1, h = 2   0.24 0.14 0.11 0.09 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
                            = 1, h = 3   0.26 0.09 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 1, h = 4   0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 2, h = 1   0.18 0.12 0.09 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02       0.8
                            = 2, h = 2   0.32 0.13 0.12 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 2, h = 3   0.26 0.15 0.09 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 2, h = 4   0.16 0.1 0.11 0.08 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02
                            = 3, h = 1   0.15 0.14 0.04 0.03 0.01 0.01
                            = 3, h = 2   0.25 0.09 0.06 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01                               0.01 0.01       0.6
                            = 3, h = 3
           Layer , head h




                                         0.32 0.13 0.11 0.06 0.05 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 3, h = 4   0.34
                            = 4, h = 1   0.13 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 4, h = 2   0.93      0.01
                            = 4, h = 3   0.92      0.02                                                                        0.4
                            = 4, h = 4   0.13 0.19 0.09 0.08 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 5, h = 1   0.42 0.08 0.1 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 5, h = 2   0.93      0.02
                            = 5, h = 3   0.91      0.04
                            = 5, h = 4    0.9      0.04                                                                        0.2
                            = 6, h = 1   0.92      0.03
                            = 6, h = 2   0.11 0.07 0.16 0.07 0.09 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01
                            = 6, h = 3   0.91      0.03
                            = 6, h = 4   0.12 0.55 0.04 0.1 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01
                                                                                                                               0.0
                                          1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8       9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                 j

Figure 19: Plots of all inner products Aℓ,h [T4,6
                                              1000
                                                   ], findj 10,3 for n = 10 samples X 1 , . . . , X 10 ∈ dom(hop3 )
for the 6-layer transformer T4,6
                              1000
                                   .




                                                                              58
