     Active Learning with Tabular Language Models


                Martin Ringsquandl                                  Aneta Koleva
                   Siemens AG                                     Siemens AG, LMU
                 Munich, Germany                                  Munich, Germany
         martin.ringsquandl@siemens.com                      aneta.koleva@siemens.com



                                             Abstract
         Despite recent advancements in tabular language model research, real-world appli-
         cations are still challenging. In industry, there is an abundance of tables found in
         spreadsheets, but acquisition of substantial amounts of labels is expensive, since
         only experts can annotate the often highly technical and domain-specific tables.
         Active learning could potentially reduce labeling costs, however, so far there are
         no works related to active learning in conjunction with tabular language models. In
         this paper we investigate different acquisition functions in a real-world industrial
         tabular language model use case for sub-cell named entity recognition. Our results
         show that cell-level acquisition functions with built-in diversity can significantly
         reduce the labeling effort, while enforced table diversity is detrimental. We fur-
         ther see open fundamental questions concerning computational efficiency and the
         perspective of human annotators.


1   Introduction
Recent tabular language models (TaLMs) which are based on pre-trained transformers and modality-
adapted to tabular data have shown promising results on academic datasets [3]. However, using
pre-trained transformer models for complex tasks in industry still requires fine-tuning with substantial
amounts of labels. Although tabular data in spreadsheets is ubiquitous in industry, the application
of TaLMs in real-world settings is still marginal. One reason is that acquiring labels for industrial
spreadsheets, e.g. cell-level entity or column annotations, quickly becomes prohibitively expensive
considering that often highly technical and domain specific language can only be annotated by a
handful of experts.
Settings with abundant unlabeled data and costly label acquisition are perfect matches for active
learning (AL), which aims to minimize the costs of acquiring labeled data by maximizing model’s
performance with each new labeled instance. Deep neural networks, such as large-scale transformers,
require batch-based acquisition functions instead of classical one-by-one instance selection, since
these large models need to be trained for multiple epochs on batches of labeled data to effectively
change the model’s parameters for the next iteration of candidate acquisition. Otherwise training
is inefficient and can lead to overfitting [7]. A popular approach here is to have hybrid acquisition
functions that weigh instance-wise uncertainty against some within-batch similarity (diversity) of all
instances [11].
In the text data modality, batch typically means a set of sentences or documents. Even for a given
token-level task such as named entity recognition (NER), we still want to select the most informative
sentences (not single tokens), since all NER labels depend on the full sentence context. In AL terms,
NER is a so-called multi-instance problem [10]. Transferring this to tabular data, a batch therefore
should be a set of tables. Given a cell-level task, where each cell may have multiple labels, this is
now a nested multi-instance problem. Since the instance is the full table, each table has multiple
cells and cells have multiple labels. Until now, the table modality for AL has not been explored and it
is unclear how to deal with such a novel AL problem. In this paper, we study how well-known AL

Table Representation Learning Workshop at NeurIPS 2022
Figure 1: Overview of our industrial sub-cell NER problem and the active learning candidate
acquisition.


acquisition functions can be adopted to TaLMs to solve an industrial sub-cell NER task where named
entities are mentioned in tables cells.
Our key contributions are the following:
       • We present an industrial NER use case for TaLMs in conjunction with AL.
       • We outline novel problems that arise with AL when dealing with tabular data.
       • We adopt well-known AL acquisition functions to tables and carry out an empirical evalua-
         tion on a real-world industrial dataset.

2   Industrial Table NER Use Case
Our use case originates from the need for information extraction to support data management in
the process industry. Industrial plant operators have to maintain data about plant equipment, such
as actuators, sensors, vessels, etc., processes, and ingredients among others. This data is used, for
example, for process monitoring, maintenance, or other regulatory reasons. Typically, still today such
data is collected and maintained by engineers in some form of spreadsheets. The spreadsheets are
roughly organized in a tabular format, as shown in the example table in Figure 1. In these spreadsheets,
each row typically represents information about one or multiple equipment instances. Some columns
represent relevant physical properties of these equipment, while others are non-informative. However,
the engineers do neither comply to a fixed schema, nor to unified spelling of equipment or properties.
The NER task is to automatically extract relevant entities for creating structured specifications of the
plant equipment. We phrase this problem as NER task (sub-cell NER) with the following types of
entities. The type TAG refers to a systematic identifier of an equipment. There are some conventions
for generating equipment tags, but most plant operators customize them and some sheets do not
contain identifiers at all. Type EQ is for surface names of equipment types. The type QUANT refers
to the physical properties/quantities describing the functional specifications of equipment and the
type UoM stands for unit of measurement.
As these tables can get quite large, e.g. hundreds of rows, labeling all cells in a single table is already
too time-consuming for human annotators. However, table cells can contain lots of similar, repetitive


                                                    2
content, where it may be enough to provide small amount of labels to reach good performance.
Therefore, we are interested in AL acquisition functions that would select the most informative
instances to be labeled, but it is unclear on which level (token, cell, table) to select instances, as
shown in the bottom of Figure 1.

3    AL and TaLMs
In this section we give a general introduction of AL and define our TaLM for sub-cell NER.
Given an unlabeled dataset XU ∼ P sampled from some true unknown distribution P. The objective
of pool-based AL is to select candidates XS ⊂ XU to be labeled with restricted budget m ≥ |XS |
and m ≪ |XU | such that:
                                   arg min Ex∼P [ℓ(fθ (x), y)] ,                            (1)
                                          XS
where y is the corresponding label of instance x, ℓ(·) is a loss function and fθ is a classification
model trained on data XS with revealed labels from an oracle. Finding the optimal candidate set XS
w.r.t. 1 is infeasible since in AL by definition we do not have access the true distribution nor any
labels (except for a small seed set). However, based on principles such as uncertainty sampling AL
research has proposed several heuristics to address this problem. These heuristics are often called
query strategies or acquisition functions facq (xu ; fθ ) : XU → R assigning a score to every instance
based on the current classification model fθ . Typically, AL is performed in an iterative fashion where
candidates in the next iteration are sampled considering the model trained on the previous candidates.
In our case fθ is a TaLM and XU consists of a set of tables. We define a table as a tuple T =
(C, H), where C = {c1,1 , c1,2 , . . . ci,j , . . . , cn,m } is the set of table body cells for n rows and m
columns. Every cell ci,j = wci,j ,1 , wci,j ,2 , . . . , wci,j ,t is a sequence of tokens of length t. The
table header H = {h1 , h2 , . . ., hm } is the set of corresponding m column header cells, where
hj = whj ,1 , whj ,2 , . . . , whj ,t is a sequence of header tokens.
Our TaLM consists of an encoder which will produce a table context-sensitive representation for each
token:
                         wh1 ,1 , . . . , whm ,t , wc1,1 ,1 , . . . , wcn,m ,t = E NC(T ),            (2)
where E NC is a table-biased transformer encoder using the row-column visibility matrix instead of
vanilla attention and only within-cell positional encoding, refer to [6] for a more detailed description
of this architecture. Note that most TaLM architectures like TURL [2] are not directly applicable
here, since they already aggregate tokens within cells to get cell-level representations. This is why
we resort to this TaLM based on a pre-trained language model and modality adapt it to tables while
fine-tuning for the sub-cell NER task.
Each labeled cell has an NER-tag sequence: (y1 , y2 , . . . , yt ), where each yi ∈ Y. We use IO tags,
thus Y is {O} ∪ {I-ENT}, where ENT ∈ {TAG, EQ, QUANT, UoM}. Our TaLM decoder D EC is
a classification layer that projects each token representation into the label space, plus a Softmax
activation to assign a normalized score for each class.

                                    ŷi,j,z = fθ (T ) = D EC(E NC(T )),                                 (3)
where ŷi,j,z is the probability distribution of the labels of the z-th token in header or body cell i, j.

4    Table NER Acquisition Function
As mentioned above, AL is primarily concerned with the choice of an acquisition function. This
function assigns a score to each instance, thereby determining which new (unlabeled) instances to
select for labeling such that they maximize the informativeness to the current model.
For single-instance tasks, such as text classification, the design of acquisition functions is straight-
forward - every instance has one label - so select the instance x with the most informative label
                                                            ent
distribution ŷ. For example, the popular entropy-based facq    (xU ; fθ ) = H [ŷ | xU ; fθ ], simply ranks
every xU based on the entropy H of the label distribution.
In multi-instance tasks such as NER there might be multiple labels (entity spans) in a single sentence
instance. Therefore, we want to select the instance xU where the acquisition function considers the


                                                     3
joint label distributions ŷ1 , ŷ2 , . . . , ŷt . In our table NER case, we have a nested multi-instance
problem. Every table instance Tk has multiple cells, for example body cells ck,i,j , and every such
cell has a sequence of label distributions (ŷk,i,j,1 , ŷk,i,j,2 , . . . ŷk,i,j,t ) associated with the t tokens in
the cell.
One could argue that in our table NER case, the acquisition function should select whole tables with
most informative set of cells. Unfortunately, it is not reasonable to assume that a human annotator
would have the time to annotate every cell in a full table. Hence, since a single table would already
break the annotation budget, we need an acquisition function on cell-level. One possibility is to do this
hierarchically: first select a set of tables using facq (T ; fθ ) (e.g. by clustering table representations),
then from this set of tables select a set of cells facq (ci,j ; fθ ) (e.g. by well-known multi-instance
acquisition functions).
On the other hand, note that in our TaLM for NER fθ (T ) all cells ci,j in table T are informed and
therefore depend on each other. Based on this we argue that an acquisition function facq (ci,j ; fθ ) on
cell-level is enough since it already captures the context of the full table T . In the following we adopt
common acquisition functions to select batches of most informative cells. We consider different types
of acquisition functions in our experiments - pure uncertainty-based, real-world diversity and batch
diversity.

MNLP A popular acquisition function for uncertainty-sampling in multi-instance problems is the
maximized normalized log-probability (MNLP) [9]. It considers the probability of the model’s most
likely label sequence to select new instances (here cells) ci,j with mean normalization to account for
the bias towards longer sequences. Since the most likely label sequence in our TaLM is simply the
sequence of every most likely token label we have:
                                                                t
                                       MNLP                  1X         ∗
                                      facq  (ci,j ; fθ ) =         log yi,j,z ,                                  (4)
                                                             t z=1
         ∗
where yi,j,z  is the probability of the class with the maximum probability in the predicted label
distribution. The sums of log-probabilities are negative, hence the candidates are selected in ascending
order w.r.t. to 4. MNLP has a major weakness in the batch-based AL setting. The sequences with
highest uncertainty for the current model tend to be highly correlated. Therefore, when selecting a
batch of candidates, there will be substantial similarity within the batch, providing little additional
value. For tables this means that most candidates will likely come from the same table or even the
same row/column.

MNLP+ To make MNLP less prone to selection of similar cells, we introduce a simple procedure
considering real-world diversity in the tables. Instead of selecting the cells with the highest uncertainty
from the set of all tables, we first sort all cells within every table w.r.t. to 4. Then we employ a
round-robin selection across tables by taking the current table’s best available candidate cell and
moving to the next table until the budget is empty. In other words, this acquisition is a combination
of cell uncertainty with a maximum table-diversity constraint.

BADGE As a batch-diverse acquisition function we consider Batch Active learning by Diverse
Gradient Embeddings (BADGE) [1]. Here, the authors propose to measure uncertainty in the
magnitude of the model’s last layer gradients. A diverse set of candidates is then selected using the
k-MEANS++ initialization to sample from the gradient embeddings. In our case, we take the mean of
each cell’s token gradient embeddings and feed this into k-MEANS++ to get cell candidates:

                                BADGE                                  1X
                               facq   (ci,j ; fθ ) = k-MEANS++(            gi,j,z ),                             (5)
                                                                       t z

                                      ∗
where gi,j,z = ∂θ∂out ℓCE (ŷi,j,z , yi,j,z ) is the gradient of the cross-entropy loss ℓCE of the z-th token
                                                            ∗
label distribution and its predicted maximum label yi,j,z        w.r.t. the decoder classification layer weights
  out
θ .

Rand As a simple baseline we also employ an acquisition function that selects candidate cells
uniformly at random from the set of all cells in all available tables.


                                                         4
                                   Table 1: Training tables statistics
                                        Statistic        Value
                                        #tables             55
                                        #cells            4,774
                                        #labels           1,112
                                        labels per cell    0.23


5   Experiments

In this section we describe the experiments on our real-world industrial dataset.

Dataset The dataset contains spreadsheets from multiple industrial plants. The rows in the original
sheets were downsampled, such that each resulting table had a maximum of 5 rows. Expert annotators
were then asked to label each table cell-by-cell using the prodi.gy span-based NER annotation tool.
After performing a random train-test split, we end up with 55 tables in the training set and 24 in the
test set. The training set statistics are shown in Table 1. We can see that in total they contain ∼ 1,1k
NER span labels. Dividing this by the number of cells in all tables, we observe that the vast majority
∼ 77% of cells are only comprised of tokens with label O. This is an extreme class-imbalance -
typical for industry settings. Note that Figure 1 is not representative of all tables, i.e. there are some
with much less densely populated NER labels.

AL Setup For every AL acquisition function, a single experiment starts with a set of 100 labeled
cell candidates XL as seed to initially train our NER TaLM (iteration 0). Since tasks with high
class-imbalance have strong dependence on this initial seed, we make sure that it is stratified w.r.t.
the class distribution in the overall training set. This should mitigate the risk of completely missing
minority classes in the initial seed. After seed selection, the AL acquisition function selects a batch
XS of 50 unlabeled instances (cells) from XU that are added to XL along with their true labels in
each iteration. Following the suggested protocol from [4], we fine-tune in each iteration from scratch
to avoid overfitting data from previous rounds. In each iteration we train for a maximum of 30
epochs and use a small portion of the test set as validation for early stopping. In each experiment,
all acquisition functions start with the same initial seed. The reported results are the average over
5 different experiments, i.e., 5 different initial seeds. As pre-trained language model we use the
’bert-base-uncased’ from huggingface.
After every experiment we evaluate the model’s final performance against the hold-out test set. As a
ceiling benchmark we also train our NER TaLM on the full training dataset. As performance metric
we chose the micro-averaged F1-score.


6   Results and Discussion

The test set performance throughout iterations is shown in Figure 2a. BADGE is the only acquisition
function that clearly outperforms Rand and even exceeds full training performance. Interestingly,
MNLP has only slight advantages over Rand after around 500 labels. MNLP+ is by far the worst
meaning that the forced maximum table diversity is too extreme and detrimental to performance. We
also notice higher variance for MNLP which suggests that it is more dependent on the initial seed
labels, which is a known issue in these high-imbalance settings [10]. BADGE also seems to alleviate
this problem to some degree looking more robust across different seeds.
In terms of diversity of samples we show the number of different tables from which each acquisition
function selects cells in each iteration in Figure 2b. This metric shows that MNLP suffers from
selecting similar cells from the same table with only slightly increasing number of tables. MNLP+ is
by design selecting from as many tables as the budget allows. Random sampling only samples from
roughly half the tables. This is due to an imbalance in table sizes - some large ones dominating the
uniform sampling procedure. BADGE seems to strike a good balance between table diversity and
cell uncertainty, sitting between MNLP and Rand in the number of tables.


                                                    5
                     0.45


                     0.40


                     0.35
          F1 micro

                     0.30
                                                                                          strategy
                     0.25                                                                      rand
                                                                                               mnlp
                                                                                               badge
                                                                                               mnlp+
                     0.20                                                                      full
                            150   200    250     300     350     400    450     500      550    600
                                                            labels
                                  (a) F1-score at each iteration averaged over 5 seeds

                       50
                       45
                       40
                       35                                                                 strategy
                                                                                               rand
             #tables




                       30                                                                      mnlp
                                                                                               badge
                       25                                                                      mnlp+
                       20
                       15
                       10
                            150   200    250     300     350     400    450     500      550    600
                                                            labels
                                  (b) Number of tables sampled from at each iteration
                              Figure 2: Results of different cell acquisition functions


Also note that the full training performance is lower compared to the original work [6], since we
do not use data augmentation here. Although combining AL with data augmentation looks like a
promising direction [5].

Computational Efficiency Apart from pure classification performance, we may also consider
computational efficiency. As an example, in a cell-level task, an acquisition function that retrieves a
set of k candidate cells from a single table versus k cells which span over k tables (one cell per table)
will perform much fewer computations. Especially, for large tables we may want our acquisition to
balance the informativeness of instances versus the number of tables that fit in a batch compute budget.
Alternatively, we want the acquisition to select the most informative sub-tables rows (context), such
that large tables will not impact the compute limits too much. Since TaLMs have a high memory
footprint, a very table-diverse acquisition function may be much more expensive than others.

Human Annotators On the other hand, a table-diverse acquisition function may also impact human
annotators. When presented with many different tables, the annotator probably needs more time
per cell annotation, because every table’s unique schema and context needs to be interpreted. This


                                                           6
again raises the question if the full table needs to be shown to the user to make an informed labeling
decision or a sub-table is sufficient.

7      Related Work
Pre-trained large-scale language models like BERT have been studied in AL setups for different tasks,
e.g. text classification [8]. While these models can already show good results when fine-tuning on
small labeled datasets, in industry AL is still often necessary as argued in [4], where an empirical
study of AL for BERT in text classification was carried out. They consider the challenging, practical
scenario with high class-imbalance and small annotation budget. Their results show that batch-diverse
acquisitions handle this scenario better than classical ones.
For NER deep conditional random field models have been studied with AL [9] with the focus on
computational efficiency, due to expensive training. Further the missed-class effect due to the AL’s
exploitative acquisition has been studied in NER [10]. The authors propose acquisitions for more
informed seed instance selection that can alleviate this problem.
While all of these works are relevant to ours, it is non-trivial to transfer their findings to AL on tables
using TaLMs.

8      Conclusion
In this paper we describe an industrial sub-cell NER use case for table language models and active
learning. We define this novel nested multi-instance AL problem and adopt some well-known
acquisition functions to select cell candidates from unlabeled tables. Our empirical results based on a
real-world dataset show that these acquisition functions can be applied to TaLMs and outperform
random selection. We find that balancing table diversity against label uncertainty is crucial and more
advanced acquisition functions specifically for TaLMs and tables may be needed for other tasks.
Since our work is the first to address this novel problem setting, there are still some open questions
for future work regarding computational efficiency and impact on human annotators.

References
 [1]    Jordan T. Ash et al. “Deep Batch Active Learning by Diverse, Uncertain Gradient Lower
        Bounds”. In: ArXiv abs/1906.03671 (2020).
 [2]    Xiang Deng et al. “TURL: Table Understanding through Representation Learning”. In: Proc.
        VLDB Endow. 14.3 (Nov. 2020), pp. 307–319. ISSN: 2150-8097.
 [3]    Haoyu Dong et al. “Table Pre-training: A Survey on Model Architectures, Pre-training Objec-
        tives, and Downstream Tasks”. In: IJCAI’2022 SURVEY TRACK. July 2022.
 [4]    Liat Ein-Dor et al. “Active Learning for BERT: An Empirical Study”. In: Proceedings of
        the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).
        Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2020, pp. 7949–7962.
 [5]    Yoon-Yeong Kim et al. “LADA: Look-Ahead Data Acquisition via Augmentation for Deep
        Active Learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by M. Ranzato
        et al. Vol. 34. 2021, pp. 22919–22930.
 [6]    Aneta Koleva et al. “Named Entity Recognition in Industrial Tables using Tabular Language
        Models”. In: ArXiv 2209.14812 (2022).
 [7]    Pengzhen Ren et al. “A Survey of Deep Active Learning”. In: ACM Comput. Surv. 54.9 (Oct.
        2021).
 [8]    Christopher Schröder, Andreas Niekler, and Martin Potthast. “Revisiting Uncertainty-based
        Query Strategies for Active Learning with Transformers”. In: 60th Annual Meeting of the As-
        sociation for Computational Linguistics: Findings (ACL 2022). Association for Computational
        Linguistics, May 2022.
 [9]    Yanyao Shen et al. “Deep Active Learning for Named Entity Recognition”. In: Proceedings of
        the 2nd Workshop on Representation Learning for NLP. Vancouver, Canada: Association for
        Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2017, pp. 252–256.



                                                    7
[10] Katrin Tomanek et al. “On Proper Unit Selection in Active Learning: Co-Selection Effects for
     Named Entity Recognition”. In: Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Active
     Learning for Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, June
     2009, pp. 9–17.
[11] Fedor Zhdanov. “Diverse mini-batch active learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.05954
     (2019).




                                               8
