        Towards Reasoning-Aware Explainable VQA


           Rakesh Vaideeswaran?,1 , Feng Gao2 , Abhinav Mathur2 , Govind Thattai2
                         1
                           University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
                                     2
                                       Amazon Alexa AI
           rmahesh3@illinois.edu, {fenggo,mathuabh,thattg}@amazon.com



                                               Abstract
         The domain of joint vision-language understanding, especially in the context of
         reasoning in Visual Question Answering (VQA) models, has garnered significant
         attention in the recent past. While most of the existing VQA models focus on
         improving the accuracy of VQA, the way models arrive at an answer is oftentimes
         a black box. As a step towards making the VQA task more explainable and inter-
         pretable, our method is built upon the SOTA VQA framework [1] by augmenting
         it with an end-to-end explanation generation module. In this paper, we inves-
         tigate two network architectures, including Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
         and Transformer decoder, as the explanation generator. Our method generates
         human-readable textual explanations while maintaining SOTA VQA accuracy on
         the GQA-REX (77.49%) and VQA-E (71.48%) datasets. Approximately 65.16%
         of the generated explanations are approved by humans as valid. Roughly 60.5% of
         the generated explanations are valid and lead to the correct answers.


1   Introduction
Problems involving joint vision-language understanding are
gaining more attention in both Computer Vision (CV) and
Natural Language Processing (NLP) communities. In recent
years, complex reasoning problems in the vision-language do-
main have been in the spotlight. In the classic Visual Ques-
tion Answering (VQA) problem, reasoning has been highly
involved. In [2, 3, 4], a model needs to reason over spatial and
quantificational relationships within an image-question pair.
[5] incorporates spatial-temporal reasoning as well as domain-
specific knowledge. A more challenging setting, such as [6, 7],          Q: Is the stovelight on? GT Ans: Yes
requires the capability to make use of external knowledge to             M1, M2, M3: Yes
perform reasoning in the vision-language domain.                         C: There is a stove and a bunch of knives
We see impressive improvements in VQA accuracy in [8, 9,                 E: The space under the hood is brighter
                                                                         than the surrounding area.
10, 11] in both the stock setting and its variants, thanks to
the large-scale pre-trained models in both single modality and Figure 1: A VQA example shows
multi-modality. However, we barely pay attention to how a the importance of an explanation
model reaches an answer given an image-question pair. Let’s that leads to the correct answer.
take a look at Figure 1 as an illustrative example. The ground-
truth answer to the question is straightforward, and information from the image is sufficient to answer
the question. There are three different types of VQA models: Model type 1 predicts the correct
answer without providing any evidence as to how it was achieved. Model type 2 answers the question
correctly and provides a caption that summarizes the image. Unfortunately, the caption fails to unveil
    ? This author completed this work during his internship at Amazon.


2022 Trustworthy and Socially Responsible Machine Learning (TSRML 2022) co-located with NeurIPS 2022.
the reasoning chain behind predicting the correct answer to the question. Model type 3 successfully
generates a logically self-contained explanation which corresponds to the correct answer. Both Model
type 1 and Model type 2 cover most of the SOTA VQA models. Surprisingly, very few models
exist that are similar to Model type 3. Motivated by examples like in Figure 1, we investigate the
following two open topics in this paper: (i) whether a VQA model can generate a human-readable
explanation while maintaining VQA accuracy; (ii) how good are the generated explanations and how
should they be evaluated? Our contribution is two-fold:

       • We present easy-to-implement methods on top of a SOTA VQA framework which maintains
         VQA accuracy while generating human-readable textual explanations.
       • We show both quantitative experimental results and human-studies of the proposed explain-
         able VQA method. Our experiments illustrate the urgency of proposing new metrics to
         evaluate the predicted explanations in vision-language reasoning problems such as VQA.

2     Related Work
Reasoning in VQA As an end-to-end task, VQA [4] and its variants have been well explored, and
various models have kept achieving better performance along the way. Built on top of the original
setting, complex reasoning tasks are heavily involved. [4, 12] introduce quantificational reasoning
into the setting. [3, 13, 2] highlight the importance of fine spatial and compositional reasoning in the
VQA problem. While the above datasets limit the reasoning domain within the image, [6, 14] propose
a visual language task that requires external knowledge, sometimes even domain-specific knowledge,
to answer the question. In [15], the emphasis is on the logical entailment problem. Recent methods
such as [8, 9, 10] take advantage of the unprecedented amount of vision-language data and large size
of models, achieving SOTA performances on the above VQA datasets. As the reasoning problem in
VQA is becoming more and more complicated, it is urgent to have an interpretable way to analyze
and diagnose the model and measure its reliability.

Explainable VQA and Metrics Very few SOTA VQA works investigate model explainability,
especially in the age of big data and big models. [16] is one of the standard datasets that focuses
on explainability. A similarity score between the question and the image caption is computed to
check for question-relevant captions. The caption is then used to generate an explanation that is
relevant to the question-answer pair. [17, 18] use image attributes and captions to provide a naive
version of the explanation to the answer. Some works [19, 11] make use of textual knowledge from
external sources to improve the interpretability of the model. However, such external knowledge is
not always able to provide direct evidence to the answer. The neural-symbolic framework [20] is
also applied in the VQA domain since it is naturally more interpretable than the pure deep learning
based methods. More works [21, 22] have recently been proposed for enhancing the explainability
of the VQA problem using either natural or synthetic data. Another topic that is not well-studied in
explainable VQA is the evaluation of explanations. In [16, 22], conventional NLP metrics such as
ROUGE, BLEU scores are used to measure the quality of the generated explanation. In contrast to
[16], [21] doesn’t use a caption as the explanation, instead it uses tokens representing a bounding box
in the image to replace key parts in the scene graph.

3     Methodology
In this section, we describe our method in detail. Please refer to Figure 2 for an overview of the model
flow and architecture. The proposed method consists of two major components: (i) coarse-to-fine
visual language reasoning for VQA and (ii) explanation generation module.

3.1   Extracting Features and Predicates

A pre-trained Faster-RCNN model[23] is used to extract features for each Region of Interest (RoI) in
the image I. The image features are denoted as fI . Similarly, a Faster-RCNN model is also used to
extract objects and attributes that form the image predicates. We generate the Glove embedding[24]
for each word in the set of image predicates, denoted as pI . The words in the question Q are also
encoded using Glove embeddings. The question embeddings are then passed through a GRU to


                                                   2
                                              Image Encoder                                                            Coarse-to-Fine Reasoning
                                                                                                                                                          A: no
                                                         Image Features
                                                                                                                            Semantic Reasoning


                                       RCNN                                            Question Encoder
                                                                                                                                                           MLP

                                                Predicates (Labels)            Glove
                                                                                                   GRU
                                                     blue, sky
                                                                      Glove                                                 Multimodal Learning
                                                man, riding, horse
                                                  brown, horse
                                              horse, walking, beach
                                                                                                                                                       Explanation
                                                                                                                                                        Generator
                                                                                             Predicates (Labels)

                                                                                                   horse,      Glove
                                                                              Stop Word
                                                                                                  walking,
                                                                                 Filter
 Q: Is the horse walking on a trail?                                                                trail                   Information Filtering
                                                                                                                                                    E: a man is riding a
                                                                                                                                                    horse on the beach




                       Figure 2: An overview of coarse-to-fine VQA with explanation generation.

extract sequential features fQ . Together with this, question predicates are extracted by passing the
question through a stop word filter. The stop words not only consist of words from NLTK[25],
but also include those words in questions that occur less frequently (threshold=10). Each question
predicate is then encoded with Glove embedding. Question predicates are denoted as pQ .

3.2       Coarse-to-Fine Reasoning for VQA

VQA can be generally formulated as (I, Q) → a, where a ∈ A and A is the set of answers. Usually,
the answer set A is filtered by a frequency threshold from the annotated answers. The coarse-to-fine
reasoning framework can be formalized as:
                                  a∗ = arg max CFRθ (a|fI , pI , fQ , pQ )
                                                         a
                                                                                                                                                                    (1)
                                         = arg max SR(a|IF(fI , pI , fQ , pQ ), MM(fI , pI , fQ , pQ ))
                                                         a

where CFRθ is an end-to-end module with learnable parameter θ. It consists of three different
modules, including an information filtering module IF, a multimodal learning module MM, followed
by a semantic reasoning module SR.

Information Filtering The extracted features may be noisy and contain incorrect information as
they are extracted from pre-trained models. This module helps remove unnecessary information and
aids in understanding the importance of RoIs in images for each question.

Multimodal Learning Bilinear Attention Networks are used to learn features at both coarse-
grained and fine-grained levels. The coarse-grained module works with image and question features
and predicates and produces a joint representation at the coarse-grained level. The fine-grained
module learns the correlation between the filtered image and the question information and learns a
joint representation at the fine-grained level.

Semantic Reasoning This module learns selective information from both the coarse-grained and
fine-grained module outputs. The joint embedding from this module is then fed into a multi-layer
perceptron to perform answer prediction and to the explanation module for explanation generation.

3.3       Explanation Generation

The joint embedding from the semantic reasoning module is used to train an explanation generator
with ground-truth explanations as supervision. The VQA backbone is augmented with the explanation
generation module. Two architectures are evaluated for explanation generation: (i) Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM), (ii) Transformer Decoder. The LSTM architecture used consists of 2 layers, with
an input dimension of 768. The Transformer Decoder architecture has an input dimension of 768,
and consists of 8 attention heads. In both cases, the input is a joint embedding and is trained using
ground-truth explanations from the dataset (discussed in the following section) using cross-entropy
loss for each word. Suppose we have an explanation E = (w1 , ..., wi , .., wl ), where wi ∈ V, the
vocabulary and l is the length of the explanation. The explanation can therefore be represented as a
sequence of one-hot encoded vectors. The loss function is therefore given by:


                                                                                       3
                                                                       l X|V|
                                                                 1     X
                                                Lexpl = −            ·        yi,k · log(p(wi,k ))                                                                 (2)
                                                              l · |V| i=1
                                                                                           k=1
where yi,k is the one-hot vector for the ith word in the ground-truth explanation and p(wi,k ) is the
probability of the k th word in V at the ith time step. We also make use of teacher enforcing to train
the explanation module with autoregressive cross-entropy loss.

4     Experiments
4.1   Datasets and Evaluation
           Q: What is this bird called?               Q: What is the woman in front of ?         Q: What type of plant is this?       Q: Is the horse walking on a trail?


           A: parrot                                  A: statue                                  A: broccoli                          A: no
                                                             statue        woman
                                 parrot

           E: (obj:329774) is parrot                  E: (obj:521700) that (obj:521697)          E: a broccoli plant in the           E: a man is riding a horse on the
                                                      is in front of is statue                   ground near other plant life         beach


                                          (a)                                                                                   (b)

                Figure 3: Examples from (a) GQA-REX dataset, (b) VQA-E dataset.
As discussed in section 2, there are a limited number of datasets that come with annotated explanations
along with answers. Owing to the large dataset size, we perform our experiments on the GQA-REX
and VQA-E datasets, although they have their own set of limitations. In this section, we measure
the accuracy of the predicted answer and the quality of the generated explanation. To evaluate the
predicted answer, we use the VQA score as the metric. Unfortunately, we don’t have accurate metrics
for explanation evaluation. Therefore, we report qualitative results from a human-study as well as
quantitative results using conventional NLP metrics such as ROUGE and BLEU.

GQA-REX contains explanations for almost 98% of the samples in the GQA-balanced dataset. It
contains around 1.04M question-answer (QA) pairs spanning across 82K images, with annotated
explanations (1 explanation per QA pair). However, the explanations are consistent with the reason-
ing framework proposed in [21] and are therefore not completely in human-readable form (Refer
Figure 3(a)). Although the explanations can be converted to human readable form using information
from scene graphs, there exist instances of grammatical inaccuracy.

VQA-E contains explanations for around 40% of the QA pairs in the VQA2.0 dataset (1 explanation
per QA pair). The explanations are generated by comparing the similarity scores between the
caption candidates and the ground-truth question-answer pair. It is, therefore, not surprising that the
explanations seem more like captions of the image that contains the answer. Figure 3(b) illustrates a
couple of examples from the VQA-E dataset.

4.2   VQA Experimental Results

       Dataset                         Expl. Model    We use the CFRF[1] model as the
                                                               α              VQA score
      VQA-E[16]                            N/A        backbone and augment it with an ex-
                                                             N/A                71.48
                                          LSTM        planation generation module based on
                                                             0.25               71.36
                                          LSTM        (i) LSTM and (ii) Transformer De-
                                                             0.50               71.55
                                          LSTM        coder. The baseline model is trained
                                                             0.75               71.53
                                          LSTM        without any explanations as supervi-
                                                              1.0               71.32
                                       Transformer    sion. Since our goal is to generate
                                                             0.50               71.46
  GQA-REX[21]                              N/A        explanations while maintaining the
                                                             N/A                77.49
                                          LSTM        VQA performance, we incorporate
                                                             0.25               75.08
                                          LSTM        both the loss for VQA answer and
                                                             0.50               77.16
                                          LSTM        the supervision from the ground-truth
                                                              1.0               77.33
                                       Transformer    explanation. In order to investigate
                                                             0.50               77.06
                                                      the impact of two different training
Table 1: VQA scores of the predicted answers from our signals, we design the loss function
method on VQA-E and GQA-REX validation datasets.      for the end-to-end training as follows:
                                                      L = αLans + (1 − α)Lexpl , where


                                                                                           4
Lans is the cross-entropy loss between the predicted answer and the ground truth answer, Lexpl is
the loss function of the explanation generation module, as represented by Equation 2, and α ∈ [0, 1]
is the balance factor. As shown in Table 1, our methods successfully maintain the VQA scores while
generating textual explanations.

4.3   Results of Generated Explanations

Quantitative Results We use the explanations generated by the CFRF+LSTM model, correspond-
ing to α = 0.75 (Refer Table 1). The results of BLEU-1 and ROUGE scores are presented. Note that
ROUGE scores are F1 scores. As shown in Table 2, although our method outperforms the baseline,
the absolute scores are only satisfactory.

         Dataset          Model         BLEU-1 ROUGE-1 ROUGE-2 ROUGE-L
        VQA-E val      Baseline[16]       0.268          -             -         0.249
                      CFRF+LSTM            0.33        0.364         0.117       0.325
      Table 2: Quantitative evaluation of the generated explanations on VQA-E validation set.

As mentioned in section 2, in the VQA domain, there is no standard common practice to quantitatively
evaluate generated explanations. Although both VQA-E and GQA-REX suggest using conventional
NLP metrics such as ROUGE and BLEU scores to evaluate generated explanations, it is not ideal.
These metrics are particularly designed for string matching in the form of overlapping n-grams.
Figure 4 illustrates why such metrics are practically unreliable.

                    Q: Is the lady going for a walk in the rain?       Q: What are all of the people doing?   Q: What color are his shorts?
                    GT Ans.: Yes                                       GT Ans.: flying kites                  GT Ans.: black
                    GT Expl: A woman holding an umbrella               GT Expl.: A group of people are        GT Expl.: A man in red shirt and
                    facing a row of shops that are closed for          flying kites in the sky.               black shorts playing a game of tennis.
                    the night.
                                                                                                              Predicted Ans.: black
                    Predicted Ans.: Yes                                Predicted Ans.: flying kites           Predicted Expl.: A man in blue shirt
                    Predicted Expl.: a woman is walking in             Predicted Expl.: A group of people     and white shorts playing a game of
                    the rain with an umbrella.                         flying kites in the sky.               tennis
                          BLEU-1: 0.27. Rouge-1-F1: 0.39.                  BLEU-1: 0.89. Rouge-1-F1: 0.94.         BLEU-1: 0.84. Rouge-1-F1: 0.83.

                   (a)                                                    (b)                                    (c)

Figure 4: Problem with using string matching metrics to evaluate generated explanations in VQA.
In Figure 4(a), our model predicts the correct answer. However, according to the string matching
metrics, the quality of the explanation is poor. In fact, interestingly, both the generated explanation
and the ground-truth explanation in Figure 4(a) are annotated as valid by human annotators. On the
other hand, the generated explanation in Figure 4(b) is almost identical to the ground truth, and both
of them are approved by human subjects as valid explanations for the answer. In Figure 4(c), even
though the predicted explanation is wrong, the string matching score is very high. These examples
lead to the following conclusion: we need to find a more reliable metric to evaluate generated
explanations for the VQA problem.

Human Study Setup Since no mature quantitative metrics are available, we introduce humans into
the loop. We conducted a human subject study using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). The goal of
our subject study is to evaluate the quality of the explanation from human annotation. One example
of the human intelligence task (HIT) is shown in Figure 5:




                            Figure 5: An example of a HIT in the human study.
Given an image-question pair from the VQA-E validation set, we designed two questions for the
annotators. Both questions are the same, asking whether an explanation leads to the answer. But the
contexts are different. In the first question, both the explanation and the answer are generated by our


                                                                   5
         Context              Yes       No, but contains the Ans.       No       Not determined
     predicted [total]      56.46%               9.02%                34.12%          0.4%
    predicted [unique]      65.16 %              2.01%                32.8%          0.03%
    ground-truth [total]     83.90%               5.12%               10.98%            0%
   ground-truth [unique] 93.12%                   0.57%                6.31%            0%
Table 3: Statistics of the raw human annotation data. It contains 4735 unique examples from the
VQA-E validation set. Each job is distributed to 3 different annotators to eliminate potential bias.
model. In the second question, we provide the ground-truth explanation and answer. The subjects
have the same set of four options to choose from in both cases. They are as follows: (i) Yes; (ii) No,
but contains the answer; (iii) No; (iv) Not determined. Annotators have no idea which context is the
ground truth. Specifically, option (ii) "No, but contains the answer" means the explanation contains
a sub-string that matches the predicted answer but it does not lead to the answer. Option (iv) "Not
determined" means the explanation leads to the answer, but the reasoning chain may be contradictory.

Human Approved Results We randomly selected 4735 unique image-question pairs from the
VQA-E validation set for the human study. Each image-question pair makes up one HIT with the
same setting as in Figure 5. In order to eliminate individual bias, we assigned each HIT to three
different workers. Therefore, in total, we received 4735 × 3 = 14205 responses from 111 subjects.
The raw distribution of subject annotations for all the 14205 responses (predicted [total] and ground-
truth [total]) is shown in Table 3. From the total set of responses, questions for which there is no
consensus among the three annotators (all three responses are different) are discarded (869 out of
4735). Following this, we calculate the vote using mode, i.e., a majority vote for the unique HITs.
Among the 3866 unique HITs, 65.16% of the generated explanations lead to the predicted answers,
while 2.01% of them contain the answers but make no sense. 32.8% of the generated explanations
fail to make connections with the predicted answers. On the other hand, 93.12% of the ground-truth
explanations lead to ground-truth answers. According to [16], because the ground-truth explanations
are selected by comparing the similarity between the question-ground-truth-answer pair and the
caption candidates, most of them are valid.
                                        Predicted                   Ground-truth
                               Valid Expl. Invalid Expl. Valid Expl. Invalid Expl.
               Correct Ans.     56.39%          23.77%         93.11%          6.88%
               Wrong Ans.        8.77%          11.05%            -               -
     Table 4: Ratio of valid/invalid explanation based on the correctness of the predicted answer.
Besides raw annotations, we also provide a more straightforward result, as shown in Table 4. Among
the 3866 unique HITs, we find that in 56.39% of the cases, our model can predict both the correct
answer as well as generate valid explanations. 23.77% of the explanations are not valid, although the
predicted answers are correct. It may either make no sense or contain the answer in it, albeit with
little significance. Only in 8.77% of the cases, our model generates a good explanation but leads to a
wrong answer. On the other hand, we also observe that 6.88% of the ground-truth explanations are
not reasonable. Therefore, our model is able to answer questions correctly and also generate valid
explanations approximately 60.5% of the time.

5   Conclusion and Future Work
We explore the task of Explainable Visual Question Answering (Explainable-VQA). We leverage
the Coarse-to-Fine reasoning framework as the VQA backbone and augment it with an explanation
generation module using two architectures: LSTM and Transformer Decoder. Our model generates
an explanation along with an answer while also maintaining close to SOTA VQA performance. We
conduct both objective experiments and a human study to evaluate the generated explanation, pointing
out the urgency of proposing new metrics for explainable VQA.

Future Work We plan to improve the quality of generated explanations as well as leverage them to
increase VQA accuracy. We urge proper metrics to evaluate explanations for the VQA problem.

Acknowledgement We thank Nguyen et al., the authors of [1] for providing us with the features
and predicates for the VQA 2.0 dataset and helping with answering all queries in a timely manner.


                                                  6
References
 [1] Binh X Nguyen, Tuong Do, Huy Tran, Erman Tjiputra, Quang D Tran, and Anh Nguyen.
     Coarse-to-fine reasoning for visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4558–4566, 2022.
 [2] Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
     Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual
     genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. 2016.
 [3] Drew A Hudson and Christopher D Manning. Gqa: A new dataset for real-world visual
     reasoning and compositional question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
     on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 6700–6709, 2019.
 [4] Stanislaw Antol, Aishwarya Agrawal, Jiasen Lu, Margaret Mitchell, Dhruv Batra, C Lawrence
     Zitnick, and Devi Parikh. Vqa: Visual question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE
     international conference on computer vision, pages 2425–2433, 2015.
 [5] Rowan Zellers, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. From recognition to cognition:
     Visual commonsense reasoning. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
     Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.
 [6] Peng Wang, Qi Wu, Chunhua Shen, Anthony Dick, and Anton Van Den Hengel. Fvqa:
     Fact-based visual question answering. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
     intelligence, 40(10):2413–2427, 2017.
 [7] Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ok-vqa: A visual
     question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. In Conference on Computer
     Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
 [8] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson,
     Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual
     language model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.
 [9] Zelin Zhao, Karan Samel, Binghong Chen, et al. Proto: Program-guided transformer for
     program-guided tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17021–17036,
     2021.
[10] Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal,
     Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, et al. Image as a foreign language:
     Beit pretraining for all vision and vision-language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.10442,
     2022.
[11] Feng Gao, Qing Ping, Govind Thattai, Aishwarya Reganti, Ying Nian Wu, and Prem Natarajan.
     A thousand words are worth more than a picture: Natural language-centric outside-knowledge
     visual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05299, 2022.
[12] Yash Goyal, Tejas Khot, Douglas Summers-Stay, Dhruv Batra, and Devi Parikh. Making
     the v in vqa matter: Elevating the role of image understanding in visual question answering.
     In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
     6904–6913, 2017.
[13] Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens Van Der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick,
     and Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary
     visual reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
     recognition, pages 2901–2910, 2017.
[14] Kenneth Marino, Mohammad Rastegari, Ali Farhadi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Ok-vqa: A visual
     question answering benchmark requiring external knowledge. In Proceedings of the IEEE/cvf
     conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 3195–3204, 2019.
[15] Alane Suhr, Stephanie Zhou, Ally Zhang, Iris Zhang, Huajun Bai, and Yoav Artzi. A corpus for
     reasoning about natural language grounded in photographs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00491,
     2018.


                                                7
[16] Qing Li, Qingyi Tao, Shafiq Joty, Jianfei Cai, and Jiebo Luo. Vqa-e: Explaining, elaborating,
     and enhancing your answers for visual questions. In Proceedings of the European Conference
     on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 552–567, 2018.
[17] Qing Li, Jianlong Fu, Dongfei Yu, Tao Mei, and Jiebo Luo. Tell-and-answer: Towards explain-
     able visual question answering using attributes and captions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09041,
     2018.
[18] Jialin Wu, Zeyuan Hu, and Raymond J Mooney. Generating question relevant captions to aid
     visual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00513, 2019.
[19] Jialin Wu, Liyan Chen, and Raymond J Mooney. Improving vqa and its explanations by
     comparing competing explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15631, 2020.
[20] Weixin Liang, Feiyang Niu, Aishwarya Reganti, Govind Thattai, and Gokhan Tur. Lrta: a
     transparent neural-symbolic reasoning framework with modular supervision for visual question
     answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10731, 2020.
[21] Shi Chen and Qi Zhao. Rex: Reasoning-aware and grounded explanation. In Proceedings of
     the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 15586–15595,
     2022.
[22] Leonard Salewski, A Koepke, Hendrik Lensch, and Zeynep Akata. Clevr-x: A visual reasoning
     dataset for natural language explanations. In International Workshop on Extending Explainable
     AI Beyond Deep Models and Classifiers, pages 69–88. Springer, 2022.
[23] Peter Anderson, Xiaodong He, Chris Buehler, Damien Teney, Mark Johnson, Stephen Gould,
     and Lei Zhang. Bottom-up and top-down attention for image captioning and visual question
     answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
     pages 6077–6086, 2018.
[24] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. Glove: Global vectors for
     word representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural
     language processing (EMNLP), pages 1532–1543, 2014.
[25] Edward Loper and Steven Bird. Nltk: The natural language toolkit. arXiv preprint cs/0205028,
     2002.




                                                8
Appendix A           Examples for Predicted Answers and Explanations




             Q:Are these bananas ripe?          Q: What letters are on the surfboard?    Q: Is the fridge almost empty?
                                                GT Ans: nsp                              GT Ans: no
             GT Ans: no                         GT Expl: a person holding a
             GT Expl: a pile of bananas         surfboard under his right arm            GT Expl:a fridge is open
             that are piled up on the           and walking on he beach with             with some food inside of it
             table.                             water in the background.                 Pred Ans: yes
             Pred Ans: yes                      Pred Ans: lifeguard                      Pred Expl: a fridge is
             Pred Expl:a bunch of bananas       Pred Expl: a man is holding a
                                                surfboard on the beach                   open with food in it
             that are sitting on a table

                                                                (a)




                                                 Q: How many chairs are in              Q: Is the kitty on the umbrella?
           Q: Where is the teddy bear placed?    the stack?
                                                                                        GT Answer: yes
           GT Ans: in bananas                    GT Ans: 3                              GT Expl: a brown black and
           GT Expl: a stuffed teddy bear is      GT Expl: a dog is laying in            white cat is sitting on a black
           sitting with the bananas              three chairs stacked together.         and white umbrella
           Pred Ans: tree                                                               Pred Ans: no
                                                Pred Ans: 2
           Pred Expl: a large bear is                                                   Pred Expl: a woman is sitting
                                                Pred Expl: a dog is sitting on
           standing in the grass near rocks                                             on a bench in the park
                                                a couch in front of a laptop


                                                                 (b)


Figure 6: (a) 3 examples for incorrectly predicted answer but correct explanation. (b) 3 examples for
incorrectly predicted answer and incorrect explanation.




                                                                9
Q: What type of plant is this?    Q: What sport is being performed?   Q: Is the horse walking on a trail?
GT Ans: broccoli                  GT Ans: skateboarding               GT Ans: no
GT Expl: a broccoli plant         GT Expl: a person that is           GT Expl: a man is riding a
in the ground near other          doing a skateboarding trick         horse on the beach
plant life
Pred Ans: broccoli                Pred Ans: skateboarding             Pred Ans: no
Pred Expl: a close up of a        Pred Expl: a man is doing           Pred Expl: a man is riding
broccoli plant with leaves        a trick on a skateboard             a horse on the beach




Q: Is this in the forest?         Q: Who is in the car?               Q: Is this building really tall?
GT Ans: yes                       GT Ans: cat                         GT Ans: yes
GT Expl: a blue bird is           GT Expl: a cat is sitting in        GT Expl: there is a very
sitting in the branch of a        a car near the dash                 tall tower that has a clock
tree                                                                  on it
Pred Ans: yes                     Pred Ans: cat                       Pred Ans: yes
Pred Expl: a bird is perched      Pred Expl: a cat is sitting         Pred Expl: a tall tower
on the branch of a tree           in the driver 's seat of a car      with a clock on the top of it




Q: What color is the bed sheet?   Q: Is the bird sitting?             Q: Is it cold?
GT Ans: white                     GT Ans: yes                         GT Ans: yes
GT Expl: there is a bed           GT Expl: a blue bird is             GT Expl: a man in skis is
with white sheets and             sitting on a tree branch            standing in a snowy area
pillows layer on it
Pred Ans: white                   Pred Ans: yes                       Pred Ans: yes
Pred Expl: a bed with a white     Pred Expl: a bird is sitting        Pred Expl: a man is standing in
comforter and pillows on it       on the branch of a tree             the snow with skis and ski poles

         Figure 7: 9 examples for correctly predicted answer and correct explanation.




                                                10
Q: What game is he playing?          Q: Is this stop sign red?            Q:What color is the animal?
GT Ans: baseball                     GT Ans: yes                          GT Ans: black
GT Expl: a baseball player           GT Expl: a red stop sign             GT Expl: a black bear is
is swinging a bat and some           sitting on top of a wooden           standing outdoors in the
grass                                post.                                wild.
Pred Ans: baseball                   Pred Ans: yes                        Pred Ans: black
Pred Expl: a baseball                Pred Expl: a red stop sign           Pred Expl: a black bear is
player is swinging his bat           sitting in the middle of a road      walking around in the woods




Q: How many trains are there?        Q: Where is the kite?                Q: What type of numbers are used?
GT Ans: 2                            GT Ans: sky                          GT Ans: roman numerals
GT Expl: two trains are on           GT Expl: a man sitting in            GT Expl: a clock tower
tracks in a commuter strain
                                     a field flying a kite in the         with roman numerals and a
station with people standing
                                     blue sky.                            sun dial.
on the platform between them.
Pred Ans: 2                          Pred Ans: sky                        Pred Ans: roman numerals
Pred Expl: two trains are            Pred Expl: a man is flying           Pred Expl: a clock on a building
parked on the tracks at a station    a kite in the sky high               with roman numerals and a clock




                                                                          Q: How many sinks are there?
                                    Q: Is the kite lifting in the wind?   GT Ans: 2
Q: What color is the bus?                                                 GT Expl: modern bathroom
                                    GT Ans: yes
GT Ans: red                         GT Expl: folks flying a kite in       with two sinks a toilet and a
GT Expl: a red bus parked                                                 shower.
                                    the water of a nice beach.
in front of a building near a
street.                             Pred Ans: yes                         Pred Ans: 2
                                    Pred Expl: a kite flying in the       Pred Expl: a bathroom with
Pred Ans: red                       sky over a body of water
Pred Expl: a red and white bus                                            two sinks and a mirror above it
parked in front of a building


        Figure 8: 9 examples for correctly predicted answer and correct explanation.




                                                   11
Q: What colors are the dining          Q: What is the bottom cat doing?    Q: Which room is this?
plates?
GT Ans: blue and white                 GT Ans: sitting                     GT Ans: bathroom
GT Expl: two slices of pizza           GT Expl: a cat that is              GT Expl: a bathroom
are on a blue and white plate          sitting on some steps.              which has a telephone, sink
on a coffee table.                                                         and mirror.
Pred Ans: blue and white               Pred Ans: sitting                   Pred Ans: bathroom
Pred Expl: a pizza sitting on top of   Pred Expl: a black and white        Pred Expl: a cat is sitting in a
a white plate covered in cheese and    cat is sitting in a black and       bathroom sink and is looking
veggies                                white photo                         out into the distance




 Q: What type of meat appears          Q: What color is the bench?         Q: What sport is being played?
 on the sandwich?                      GT Ans: green                       GT Ans: tennis
 GT Ans: chicken                       GT Expl: an old green               GT Expl: a tennis player
 GT Expl: a chicken sandwich           wood bench on a porch               with a racket on a court
 and fries on a table.                 with a white railing.
                                       Pred Ans: green                     Pred Ans: tennis
 Pred Ans: chicken
 Pred Expl: a chicken                  Pred Expl: a man sitting on a       Pred Expl: a tennis player
 sandwich with onions and              park bench next to a green          is swinging his racket on
 onions on a plate                     field                               the court




                                                                          Q: What kind of animal is pictured?

 Q: What mode of transportation is     Q: What color are the boats?       GT Ans: giraffe
 this?                                 GT Ans: blue                       GT Expl: a very large giraffe
 GT Ans: bus                           GT Expl: several small             that is standing in the woods
 GT Expl: a bus is riding
 down     the    street   with         blue boats side by side out
 passengers.                           in the open.                       Pred Ans: giraffe
 Pred Ans: bus                         Pred Ans: blue                      Pred Expl: a giraffe is
 Pred Expl: a bus is parked in         Pred Expl: a couple of small
 the parking lot while a
                                                                           standing in the grass near a
                                       boats are on the blue water         fence
 passenger boards

         Figure 9: 9 examples for correctly predicted answer but incorrect explanation.




                                                     12
