                                                        DeepJoint: Robust Survival Modelling
                                                            Under Clinical Presence Shift


                                                        Vincent Jeanselme                                    Glen Martin
                                                       MRC Biostatistics Unit                          Health e-Research Centre
                                                      University of Cambridge                          University of Manchester
arXiv:2205.13481v1 [cs.LG] 26 May 2022




                                              vincent.jeanselme@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk                  glen.martin@manchester.ac.uk

                                                           Niels Peek                                Matthew Sperrin
                                                    Health e-Research Centre                      Health e-Research Centre
                                                    University of Manchester                      University of Manchester
                                                niels.peek@manchester.ac.uk                 matthew.sperrin@manchester.ac.uk

                                                         Brian Tom                                    Jessica Barrett
                                                    MRC Biostatistics Unit                         MRC Biostatistics Unit
                                                   University of Cambridge                        University of Cambridge
                                               brian.tom@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk                 jessica.barrett@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk



                                                                                     Abstract
                                                  Observational data in medicine arise as a result of the complex interaction be-
                                                  tween patients and the healthcare system. The sampling process is often highly
                                                  irregular and itself constitutes an informative process. When using such data
                                                  to develop prediction models, this phenomenon is often ignored, leading to sub-
                                                  optimal performance and generalisability of models when practices evolve. We
                                                  propose a multi-task recurrent neural network which models three clinical presence
                                                  dimensions – namely the longitudinal, the inter-observation and the missingness
                                                  processes – in parallel to the survival outcome. On a prediction task using MIMIC
                                                  III laboratory tests [1], explicit modelling of these three processes showed im-
                                                  proved performance in comparison to state-of-the-art predictive models (C-index
                                                  at 1 day horizon: 0.878). More importantly, the proposed approach was more
                                                  robust to change in the clinical presence setting, demonstrated by performance
                                                  comparison between patients admitted on weekdays and weekends. This analy-
                                                  sis demonstrates the importance of studying and leveraging clinical presence to
                                                  improve performance and create more transportable clinical models.


                                         1   Introduction
                                         Machine learning has increasingly been leveraged in the medical context to model diagnoses and
                                         health outcomes given different data modalities [2, 3, 4, 5]. Despite promising results, medical data
                                         present additional domain-specific challenges that impact upon the applicability of machine learning
                                         in real-world settings. The complex interaction between patients and the healthcare system results
                                         in a dual representation of one’s health status: times and types of observations not only reflect the
                                         patient’s condition but the clinical staff’s assessment of what was needed and when. Therefore,
                                         the sampling process is an informative process, which we refer to as clinical presence for which
                                         ordering, missingness, and observation times are informative proxies.
                                         While the machine learning community has explored individual aspects of clinical presence, there
                                         are few clinical predictive models which explicitly model the full observation process. This limited

                                         Preprint. Under review.
research of clinical presence leads to approaches that assume non-informativeness. Although practi-
tioners justify ignoring clinical presence as a way to avoid leveraging a changeable and unpredictable
process [6], no evidence has been provided to justify this [7].
Finally, a key challenge of clinical presence is its heterogeneity: the same underlying covariate
distribution might present itself in different ways under different observation processes. For instance,
note how change may occur between countries and over time due to new medical discoveries or
insurance policies. The machine learning literature has explored how models may suffer from
transportability under different labels, covariates, or concept shift [8, 9]. In this paper, we explore
how a shift in the observation process might impact performance and how explicit modelling of
clinical presence might offer more robust medical models.

2     Related work
2.1   Clinical presence

Medical observations reflect the complex interaction between patient, clinical staff, and healthcare
services. In the context of a hospital stay, each observation from admission to discharge emerges
from one of these interactions. If, when, and where patients seek care is not only linked to their
medical condition but also their socio-economic characteristics, which will influence the care they
can afford [10], the distance they will have to travel, and times they can access these services [11].
On the clinical side, the choice and timing of testing and treatment procedures are guided by the
staff’s assessment of the patient’s condition. Clinical presence, therefore, breaks a key assumption of
traditional statistical modelling: observations under clinical presence are an informative sample of
the underlying distribution. Formally, for an unknown distribution f (X), clinical presence consists
in an observation process o : X → Xobs resulting in an observed distribution f (Xobs ). Modelling
f (Xobs ) is an obstacle to the application of machine learning in healthcare [12] as, under clinical
presence, the observed distribution might not present the characteristics of the true distribution we
aim to model, f (Xobs ) 6= f (X).
In this work, we look at how clinical presence might affect Electronic Health Records (EHRs) in three
different ways and how to model them appropriately. First, observation times potentially provide
information on the clinical assessment of a patient’s condition. For instance, testing frequency
may decrease when clinical staff believe that the patient’s condition is improving. Second, the
order of tests reflects their interpretation by clinical staff, e.g. if a laboratory test is inconclusive,
a second would follow. Third, missingness accompanies this previous process, e.g. a missing
value reflects its non-importance for diagnosis, or its non-informative value [13]. These different
dimensions have independently shown predictive edge [7, 14, 15] and reduced biases emerging
from this process [16]. For instance, [17] shows improved 3-year-survival predictive performance
when inputs contain missingness indicators, and [7] discusses how using this information may
improve mortality prediction. Our work shows how modelling them jointly may improve predictive
performance and robustness to transfer by encoding clinical presence in the shared representation.

2.2   Handling clinical presence

Clinical presence has been handled in multiple ways in the statistical literature [18]. In this work, we
divide the methodologies used in the machine learning literature into four groups:

       • Assumed uninformative
       • Leveraged for pre-processing
       • Featured
       • Jointly modelled

Assumed uninformative One may assume that the observed distribution f (Xobs ) is representative
of the underlying distribution f (X). For example, regular re-sampling or imputation assuming
missing-at-random patterns rely on this hypothesis. While one could obtain equal fit with these
approaches [19], inappropriate assumptions might lead to biased estimates and potentially lead to
misleading conclusions.


                                                    2
Leveraged for pre-processing One can consider clinical presence informative of the longitudinal
process and use pre-processing methods which model the clinical process to recover f (X) from the
observed distribution. Therefore, these approaches make assumptions on the observation process.
However, [7] underlines how difficult it might be to adequately model clinical presence and questions
the utility of these methodologies as they only partially recover the original distribution.

Featurized One may consider clinical presence informative of the outcome of interest and there-
fore extracts measures of clinical presence reflecting medical practitioners’ expertise that are then
leveraged as model inputs. For instance, adding missing indicators [7], observation times [17, 20, 21],
inter-observation time [22, 23], or frequency [24] have improved models’ performance. Similarly, in
an automatic fashion, attention-based models leverage the observation times as inputs [25, 26, 27].

Jointly modelled Instead of the two-step approaches described above, one can jointly model the
clinical presence. In the statistical literature, joint models [16, 28, 29], marked point process [30]
and Markov models [31] have been proposed to model the visit process and the outcome of interest.
However, these methods either rely on strong parametric assumptions or do not scale to large datasets.
Machine learning models have also been extended to leverage missing data [32] and recurrent models
to handle irregularities in time series [33]. The key idea of this last family of methods is to integrate
the temporal information by slowly converging to a ‘stable’ latent state as time passes through the use
of a decay parameter [20, 34, 35] or multi-level memory [36]. For instance, GRU-D [20] has shown
promising results by extending Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) with an exponential decay on the hidden
state, incorporating the temporal dimension in the embedding.
While all these approaches aim to tackle the problem of clinical presence, they make different
assumptions on its informativeness, have usually focused on one specific aspect of it, and didn’t study
the impact of change in this observation process.

2.3   Robustness to clinical presence shift

A fundamental feature of clinical presence is its propensity to vary as medical practices might
differ across hospitals, regions and countries and be subject to policies, insurance incentives and
the evolution of medical knowledge. This shows a crucial limitation of the application of machine
learning for medical data as models may not generalise and may become outdated as practices and
policies evolve [6]. Evidence of this problem has been suggested by region and time performance
shift [37, 38, 39, 40].
Shifts in time or between hospitals have been characterised and studied as covariates, labels or
concept shifts [8, 9]. Given a set of covariates X and an outcome Y , a covariates (resp. labels) shift
consists of a shift in f (X) (resp. f (Y )), and concept shift results in a change in the relationship
between input and output, i.e. P(Y |X). Detecting and measuring shifts have led to methodologies to
alleviate these phenomena [41, 42], and to more robust clinical embeddings [37, 39, 43].
Clinical presence shift can be understood as a combination of both covariate and concept shifts with
regard to the observed distribution f (Xobs ). Assuming the underlying distribution stable, a shift in
the observation process o to o0 results in a shift in the available data Xobs , i.e. a covariate shift from
f (o(X)) to f (o0 (X)). Additionally, despite the preservation of P(Y |X), the modelled P(Y |Xobs )
also suffers from a shift. We propose to explicitly model clinical presence in a multi-task setting to
detect this potential shift in the observation process and regularise the model to obtain a more robust
data embedding. We show how this approach results in improved performance and more robustness
to shift in clinical presence.

3     Deep Joint
In this paper, we study the problem of clinical presence in the context of EHRs. More specifically, we
focus on laboratory tests after admission to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) to predict patient survival
as these tests are ordered by clinical staff at specific times and will be more informative in their
sampling patterns than semi-automatic measurements. We propose a recurrent neural network that
jointly models the observation process, namely: (i) the time of the next observation using a temporal
point process neural network, (ii) the presence of specific tests and (iii) the expected results using
neural networks with Bernoulli and Gaussian likelihoods respectively. Finally, an extension of Cox


                                                    3
regression leveraging a neural network, known as DeepSurv [2], models the survival outcome. The
proposed model allows scalable joint modelling by an end-to-end gradient descent maximisation of
the full likelihood.

3.1   Notations

The studied medical setting consists of a population of N individuals with a vector of laboratory tests
labi,j – potentially with missing values – observed through time, in which the notation j ∈ [[0, li ]]
denotes the j th observation for patient i at time ti,j ∈ R+ , where ti,0 = 0 is the patient’s admission
to the ICU and li is the last observation for patient i. The proposed approach focuses on modelling the
clinical presence aspect of these data. To do so, we introduce the two following notations. First, we
model the elapsed time between two observations: i,j = ti,j − ti,j−1 , note the subscript i underlines
that observations may not happen at similar times for different patients. Second, the observation
process is also characterised by which laboratory tests are performed. Consequently, we introduce
mi,j = [1Lab test k observed at j ]k∈labs a vector of indicators of observed laboratory tests at observation
time ti,j .
Finally, the aim is to model the survival outcome after the first 24 hour of observation. Each patient
has, therefore, an associated time of the end of follow-up Ti and the type of observed event di for
which di = 1 signifies that the patient died, di = 0 means the patient was censored.

3.2   Architecture




Figure 1: Deep Joint Model - Multi-task modelling of clinical presence and survival outcome.
An LSTM network extracts an embedding h which is leveraged to model the clinical presence
mechanisms through the networks L – to model the longitudinal evolution, I – to model the inter-
observation time, M – to model the missingness patterns, and the survival outcome through the
network S.

The proposed architecture decomposes clinical presence into three aspects (see Section 1) that
are modelled through three different neural networks relying on the embedding hi,j outputted by
a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) at the observation time ti,j . To extract this embedding, we
adopted a Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network [44] that leverages the sequential nature of the
observed data and can capture temporal dependencies. Note, however, that the inputs are the series
of observations at irregular times. The resulting embedding is then leveraged to model the survival
outcome. We now introduce the networks used for each of these tasks.

Longitudinal process Similarly to traditional joint models, the latent state hi,j is leveraged through
a multi-layer perceptron L to model the future value of each laboratory test to be observed after a
period t from the prediction time ti,j . Assuming a Gaussian distribution for the observed data, the


                                                     4
neural network L models the mean and variance of each future covariate given both the embedding
and the prediction time, i.e.
                                  c i (t) ∼ N (µi (t), σ 2 (t))
                                  lab                   i

with µi (t) and σi (t) the means, variances vectors outputted by L(hi,j , t).

Missingness process hi,j is also used in a second multi-layer perceptron M to model the likelihood
of observing the different covariates, i.e. which tests are likely to be performed after the period t.
One can assume a Bernoulli distribution over the missingness patterns, i.e.
                                               m̂i (t) ∼ Bern(M (hi,j , t))

Temporal process A monotonic positive neural network I leverages hi,j to model the recurrent
patterns of observations. This neural network with constrained positive weights models the likelihood
of observing any new laboratory test after time t following the approach proposed in [45]. The model
allows the computing of the risk of observing an event at any time ∆ after t minutes by directly
outputting the cumulative hazard I while avoiding any parametric assumption, i.e.
                                           P(∆ > t) = exp(−I(hi,j , t))

Survival outcome Finally, to model the hazard function λ(t) defining the survival model, we used
the DeepSurv model [2] that leverages a multi-layer perceptron S to extract a non-linear covariates
shift used in a standard multiplicative proportional hazards Cox model. Given λ0 , the baseline hazard,
the hazard is expressed as:
                                       λ(t) = λ0 (t) exp(S(hi,j ))

The final model, therefore, models both clinical presence and survival outcome by leveraging
the representation hi,j extracted by the LSTM. This embeds the observation process in the latent
representation leveraged for survival modelling.

3.3   Training

For training, the aim is to maximise the likelihood of observations while maximising the survival
likelihood. To do so, the model is trained in a multi-task fashion in which each objective is back-
propagated simultaneously by averaging the loss of the different tasks: survival, longitudinal, timing
and missingness processes. As balancing the losses may greatly impact performance [46], we
ensured that no clinical presence task was over-represented in the average by computing negative
log-likelihoods for each task and using a dynamic weighting average scheme [47]. This consists in
weighting each loss related to clinical presence by its relative change at iteration e as follows:
                                                                             Ltask (e)
                          ∀ task ∈ {L, I, M }, wtask (e) = log
                                                                          Ltask (e − 1) ∗ θ
which is then normalised between the three tasks using a Softmax. L is the average training likelihood
for the given task and θ is a temperature hyperparameter that controls softness, i.e. larger values
would lead to equal weights.

Longitudinal process This first neural network aims to maximise the likelihood of the next ob-
served laboratory tests values at time i,j . The assumption of normality leads to the use of the
Gaussian log likelihood loss:
                    X X
                                                                   2
              lL =               mi,j+1 ∗ log N (labi,j+1 |µi,j , σi,j )
                      i    j∈[[1,li −1]]

                                                              (labi,j+1 − µi,j )2
                          X        X                                                     q                
                  =−                           mi,j+1 ∗                           + log       2πσi,j   2

                           i
                                                                     2σi,j 2
                               j∈[[1,li −1]]

with µi,j and σi,j the means, variances vectors outputted by L(hi,j , i,j+1 ) and ∗ the element-wise
multiplication. Note the filtering through mi,j+1 to avoid a penalty on unobserved data.


                                                               5
Missingness process Similarly, the loss for the missingness process relies on the Bernoulli distri-
bution. This leads to the binary cross entropy loss:
       X X
 lM =                 log Bern(mi,j+1 |M (hi,j , i,j+1 ))
             i    j∈[[1,li −1]]
                 X        X
          =−                          (mi,j+1 ∗ log[M (hi,j , i,j+1 )] + (1 − mi,j+1 ) ∗ log[1 − M (hi,j , i,j+1 )])
                  i   j∈[[1,li −1]]

Temporal process The likelihood of the timing process can be exactly modelled without the need
for distributional assumptions on the inter-observation distribution as the neural network returns
the cumulative intensity at horizon t. Additionally, the instantaneous intensity can be computed by
differentiation, at no extra computational cost in the context of neural networks training procedure.
                          X X                                  dI(hi,j , t)
                                                                                      
                     lI =               I(hi,j , i,j+1 ) − log
                           i
                                                                   dt        t=i,j+1
                                          j∈[[1,li −1]]

Survival outcome Finally, the survival model, DeepSurv, relies on the proportional hazards as-
sumption made by the Cox model. This results in the following log likelihood:
                                                                       
                           X                        X
                      lS =      S(hi,j ) − log           exp(S(hi,j ))
                                            i,di =1                  k,Tk >Ti

Then, the population baseline hazard, λ0 (t), is estimated as piece-wise constant based on the training
population.
The final loss is therefore defined at iteration e as X
                        l(e) = (1 − α)lS + α                                wtask (e) ∗ ltask (e)
                                                            task∈{L,I,M }
With α, a hyperparameter balancing between survival and clinical presence. This loss was evaluated
on a validation set and an early stopping strategy was adopted to stop the multi-task training. Then,
a fine-tuning of the network S with all other weights fixed – using the same stopping criterion –
allowed to improve the survival performance.

4         Experiments
This paper explored the problem of in-hospital survival prediction after 24 hours of ICU admission
using laboratory tests. We used data from the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care III
(MIMIC III) [1]. While the clinical actionability of these predictive models has been questioned
[48], it serves the optimisation of resource allocation and remains a standard comparison task in
the machine learning literature. The code for the proposed models and experiments is available on
Github1 .

4.1        Data

The MIMIC III dataset gathers anonymized laboratory tests, vital signs and diagnoses of 38,597
patients admitted to the Beth Israel Deaconess medical centre between 2001 and 2012. This analysis
focused on the laboratory tests as their ordering will follow from medical observations and practi-
tioners’ expertise. While other measurements such as vital signs monitoring may improve outcome
modelling, we chose to demonstrate the impact of clinical presence on a limited set of potentially
informative covariates as other modalities might present different clinical presence patterns. After
pre-processing [49], we selected – using an ECLAT algorithm [50] – a set of adults with shared
laboratory tests for whom at least one laboratory test of each was performed during the 24 hours after
admission and who survived at least this amount of time. This leads to a subset of 30,834 patients
with 17 different laboratory tests (See Table 1 in Appendix for a population description and Table
2 for the list of laboratory tests). Note that similar results are observed when all laboratory tests
are considered, but are more sensitive to the imputation strategies which are out of the scope of this
analysis.
      1
          https://github.com/Jeanselme/ClinicalPresence/


                                                                 6
4.2   Modelling clinical presence

The proposed approach models the in-hospital survival of patients admitted to the hospital after
24 hours of observation. To measure the gain of leveraging clinical presence, we compared our
method DeepJoint against multiple strategies relying on last observation carried forward data with
patient-mean imputation, i.e. any missing laboratory tests is replaced by the last observed results
and remaining missing data are imputed by the patient’s mean per lab test type – guaranteed to exist
because of the selection of patients presenting each laboratory test at least once. First, we compared
against two baseline approaches:

       • Last observation (Last): Extract the last observation li as representation for each patient.
         This approach assumes no informativeness in the evolution of the laboratory results.
       • Summarising (Count): Add to the previous representation the number of each test per-
         formed in the first 24 hours. This approach assumes informativeness of the counting process
         but ignores the laboratory test evolution.

Second, we used RNN-based approaches to take advantage of the longitudinal evolution of the
laboratory tests:

       • Ignoring clinical presence (Ignore): An LSTM is trained on the imputed data leveraging
         the inputs’ temporal order but ignoring their irregularity and missingness patterns.
       • Resampling (Resample): Imputed data are re-sampled every hour to satisfy the LSTM
         regularity assumption. This assumes non informativeness of the sampling process for the
         outcome of interest.
       • Modelling (GRU-D): The imputed data concatenated with missingness indicators serve as
         inputs to a GRU-D model [20] that models the inter-observation time as a decaying function,
         following the intuition that the hidden state should converge to a stable state with time.
       • Featurization (Feature): Imputed longitudinal data are concatenated with missingness
         indicators and time elapsed since previous observation [7], allowing the LSTM to extract
         information from these proxies of the clinical presence.

Finally, we propose two additional variants of our proposed model that aim to identify which aspect
of clinical presence modelling provides a predictive and robustness edge:

       • DeepJointFeature which consists of using the same input as Feature to both model and
         leverage the information contained in clinical presence as input of the recurrent neural
         network.
       • DeepJointFineTune for which the entire DeepJointFeature model is fine tuned to max-
         imise the survival likelihood in the last 500 iterations. This approach only leverages clinical
         presence to initialise weights.

For all experiments, input data were normalised and we used DeepSurv to model the hazard shift
from the population hazard baseline using a multi-layer perceptron (see Section 3.2). All methods
were trained using an Adam optimiser over 1000 epochs with early stopping on 10% of the training
set. 500 epochs were used to train the LSTM and any additional outcomes and the last iterations were
used to fine tune the survival network only. Additionally, hyperparameter tuning was performed on a
10% split of the remaining training set on the grid presented in Appendix Table 3.
Models were evaluated on a 90%-10% train-test patients split. Survival was inferred on the embedding
obtained at the last observation li in the 24 hour post-admission and performances were compared
using time-dependent C-index [51] and Brier score [52] evaluated at time horizons of 1, 7 and 14
days after the observation period. 95% confidence intervals were obtained using 100 bootstrapped
iterations on the test set predicted values.

4.3   Robustness to change in clinical presence

The previous comparison shows how handling clinical presence in different ways may impact
predictive performance. However, as mentioned earlier, one characteristic of clinical presence is
its heterogeneity: experts’ practice might change from one country to another, from one hospital to


                                                   7
another, or even in one hospital as practices change across specialities or exogeneous factors such as
day of the week. In this second set of experiments, we focused on this last scenario. Motivated by the
difference in the distribution of the numbers of tests performed during weekends and weekdays (see
Figure 3), we hypothesised that practice might differ during weekends and weekdays admissions due
to physicians and laboratory availability.




Figure 2: Robustness evaluation between patients ad-
mitted on weekdays and weekends.                               Figure 3: Total number of tests per-
                                                               formed in the 24 hours after admission
                                                               to the ICU.
The weekend effect is a well-known – while not well-understood – phenomenon in public health:
patients admitted on weekends are more likely to die than patients on weekdays [53]. While providing
an opportunity to study the transfer of survival models, this outcome difference represents a difference
in label distributions for which performance cannot directly be compared. To make this comparison
possible, we adopted the evaluation methodology used in the robustness literature. Patients were
separated given days of admission (from Monday 8 am to Saturday 8 am vs the rest). Each group of
admission were then further divided between training and testing. As described in Figure 2, a first
model uses the train set of patients admitted on weekends and tested on the test set of weekdays-
admitted patients. Then, a second model uses the train set of patients admitted on weekdays and
tested on the test set of weekdays-admitted patients. The two resulting models are comparable as
they are applied to the same test set. Moreover, to ensure that performance differences were not due
to training sample size, the weekends’ population was over-sampled to match the weekdays’ one
(similar results were observed when leveraging the whole available populations).
Finally, the opposite analysis was performed for the weekend test set. We compared the three best-
performing methodologies and the Last baseline in this second set of experiments using identical
performance metrics.

5     Results
5.1   Modelling clinical presence improves performance




Figure 4: C-Index performance on a random split of the population with 95% confidence intervals
Higher is better – The proposed methodologies (in bold) present state-of-the-art performance on
short time horizons compared to models based on the same input. This advantage fades as clinical
presence is informative of short-term instability.

Figure 4 describes the discrimination of the models at different evaluation horizons on the test set
(see also Appendix A.1.3 for Brier score and detailed results). The three proposed approaches present
competitive performances compared to models based on the same input. First, DeepJoint only
based on the laboratory tests has improved C-index in comparison to Ignore or even GRU-D which
leverages missingness as inputs. This result shows how modelling clinical presence, even if not
leveraged as inputs, leads to more predictive embedding.


                                                   8
Next, note how the baseline method Last gains from extracting features reflecting the observation
process (Count). Similarly, DeepJointFeature improves over DeepJoint and presents equivalent
results to Feature showing that the joint modelling does not provide additional predictive improve-
ment when informative features are fed as inputs and the model leverages the temporality of the data.
Finally, a full fine-tuning of the network after modelling clinical presence provides an additional
edge, suggesting that clinical presence initialisation leads to a more stable minimum.
Note how all methodologies have decreasing performance with larger time horizons. This obser-
vation results from the complexity of modelling long term survival for critically unstable patients.
Additionally, the reduced edge of modelling clinical presence stresses how the observation process
reflects short term instability as increased testing might indicate critical conditions.
These experiments show how modelling and featuring of clinical presence improves discriminative
performance. Nonetheless, we hypothesised that clinical presence modelling leads to more robust
embedding when a shift in the observation process is observed.


5.2   Joint modelling improves robustness




Figure 5: Discriminative performance evaluated on patients admitted on weekdays for a transferred
model (y-axis) and an oracle model trained on the train weekdays-admitted patients and tested on the
test set of this same group (x-axis) (with 95% confidence intervals).
Models closer to the diagonal are more robust to change in clinical presence – DeepJointFeature
presents better property under this clinical presence shift with robust discriminative performance.


Figure 5 presents the performance change of transferring the model from one clinical presence setting
to another for the top performing proposed methodologies (see Appendix for detailed results Table 6
and the complementary scenario in Appendix Figure 7). A model robust to change would be one for
which the performance on the test set of the same setting as the training set is similar to the model that
has been transferred, i.e. models close to the diagonal. Models under the diagonal show overfitting
to the training set. Therefore, one should select a model both close to the diagonal, and with the
strongest discriminative performance (upper right corner).
First, Feature presents the best predictive performance on the training set but is sensitive to the
setting shift. At the opposite end, the model based on the last observation (Last) presents the worst
discriminative performance. However, as the model does not leverage clinical presence, changes in
the observation process impact its performance to a lesser extent. The proposed DeepJointFeature
features similar level of robustness but with significantly improved discrimination. Conversely,
despite presenting better predictive performances at the population level, the proposed fine-tuned
variant is prone to overfitting. This underlines how modelling jointly the clinical presence regularises
the embedding against the shift in the observation process.
Similarly to the previous experiment, models’ differences fade with larger time horizons. However,
note how DeepJointFeature remains the model presenting the most robust performance.
This experiment underlines how jointly modelling clinical presence and survival may improve the
robustness of the embedding to change. However, traditional strategies of leveraging this information
may appear to improve performance in internal validation but are prone to overfitting when transferred
to a different clinical presence setting.


                                                    9
6   Discussion
In this work, we propose to explicitly model the clinical presence reflected in the ordering, timing
and missingness of observational longitudinal data. The novelty of the proposed approach does not
only lie in its discriminative performance but in its transportability under change in the observation
process compared to state-of-the-art approaches. Additionally, this modelling allows the detection of
change in the observation process.
Approaching clinical presence as a multi-task problem can be understood as an embedding regulari-
sation [54] which results in a more clinically relevant representation for survival prediction. However,
despite multi-task improvements observed in the literature, theoretical foundations are still lacking
[55]. Another limitation of this work is the lack of consideration of potential competing risks, but also
the assumption of independence between patients: in the medical context, and even more particularly
in the ICU setting, prioritisation is key in the delivery of care. When considering clinical presence,
the assumption of independence might consequently be questioned and calls for future work. While
we propose a set of experiments to study robustness in the MIMIC III dataset, this focuses on one
hospital, external validation would allow the quantification of the methodology’s robustness under
different shifts. Lastly, our modelling highlighted the importance of modelling clinical presence
in the context of laboratory tests. Studying the relation between adding new covariates and the
change in predictive performance would indicate potential correlation between covariates and medical
behaviour.
Finally, we would like to echo the remark on the risk of leveraging clinical presence information
raised by [6, 7] in which the authors underline how taking advantage of missing data might lead to
a mismatch between the training and deployment settings, but that ignoring this information might
not be possible. Our work proposes a way to leverage this information while informing the user
of changes in the patterns of observation. Nonetheless, practitioners should be wary of informing
medical practice by leveraging clinical presence as it may result in a self-fulfilling prophecy and
reinforced biases. Further work on the impact on medical behaviour would be a necessary step
towards deployment.




                                                   10
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work has been partially funded by UKRI Medical Research Council (MC_UU_00002/5 and
MC_UU_00002/2).

References
 [1] A. E. Johnson, T. J. Pollard, L. Shen, H. L. Li-Wei, M. Feng, M. Ghassemi, B. Moody,
     P. Szolovits, L. A. Celi, and R. G. Mark, “Mimic-iii, a freely accessible critical care database,”
     Scientific data, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2016.
 [2] J. L. Katzman, U. Shaham, A. Cloninger, J. Bates, T. Jiang, and Y. Kluger, “Deepsurv: person-
     alized treatment recommender system using a cox proportional hazards deep neural network,”
     BMC medical research methodology, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2018.
 [3] C. Lee, W. Zame, J. Yoon, and M. van der Schaar, “Deephit: A deep learning approach to
     survival analysis with competing risks,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, vol. 32, 2018.
 [4] C. Nagpal, V. Jeanselme, and A. Dubrawski, “Deep parametric time-to-event regression with
     time-varying covariates,” in Proceedings of AAAI Spring Symposium on Survival Prediction
     - Algorithms, Challenges, and Applications 2021 (R. Greiner, N. Kumar, T. A. Gerds, and
     M. van der Schaar, eds.), vol. 146 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 184–193,
     PMLR, 22–24 Mar 2021.
 [5] V. Jeanselme, B. Tom, and J. Barrett, “Neural survival clustering: Non-parametric mixture of
     neural networks for survival clustering,” in Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning,
     pp. 92–102, PMLR, 2022.
 [6] M. van Smeden, R. H. Groenwold, and K. G. Moons, “A cautionary note on the use of the
     missing indicator method for handling missing data in prediction research,” Journal of clinical
     epidemiology, vol. 125, pp. 188–190, 2020.
 [7] Z. C. Lipton, D. Kale, and R. Wetzel, “Directly modeling missing data in sequences with rnns:
     Improved classification of clinical time series,” in Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference,
     pp. 253–270, 2016.
 [8] K. Zhang, B. Schölkopf, K. Muandet, and Z. Wang, “Domain adaptation under target and
     conditional shift,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 819–827, PMLR,
     2013.
 [9] J. G. Moreno-Torres, T. Raeder, R. Alaiz-Rodríguez, N. V. Chawla, and F. Herrera, “A unifying
     view on dataset shift in classification,” Pattern recognition, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 521–530, 2012.
[10] K. T. Smith, D. Monti, N. Mir, E. Peters, R. Tipirneni, and M. C. Politi, “Access is necessary
     but not sufficient: factors influencing delay and avoidance of health care services,” MDM Policy
     & Practice, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 2381468318760298, 2018.
[11] D. Barik and A. Thorat, “Issues of unequal access to public health in india,” Frontiers in public
     health, vol. 3, p. 245, 2015.
[12] C. Xiao, E. Choi, and J. Sun, “Opportunities and challenges in developing deep learning models
     using electronic health records data: a systematic review,” Journal of the American Medical
     Informatics Association, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1419–1428, 2018.
[13] B. J. Wells, K. M. Chagin, A. S. Nowacki, and M. W. Kattan, “Strategies for handling missing
     data in electronic health record derived data,” Egems, vol. 1, no. 3, 2013.
[14] R. H. Groenwold, “Informative missingness in electronic health record systems: the curse of
     knowing,” Diagnostic and prognostic research, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2020.
[15] M. Saar-Tsechansky and F. Provost, “Handling missing values when applying classification
     models,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 8, 2007.
[16] M. Sperrin, E. Petherick, and E. Badrick, “Informative observation in health data: association
     of past level and trend with time to next measurement,” Stud Health Technol Inform, vol. 235,
     pp. 261–265, 2017.


                                                 11
[17] D. Agniel, I. S. Kohane, and G. M. Weber, “Biases in electronic health record data due to
     processes within the healthcare system: retrospective observational study,” Bmj, vol. 361, 2018.
[18] R. Sisk, L. Lin, M. Sperrin, J. K. Barrett, B. Tom, K. Diaz-Ordaz, N. Peek, and G. P. Martin,
     “Informative presence and observation in routine health data: A review of methodology for
     clinical risk prediction,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 2020.
[19] G. Molenberghs, C. Beunckens, C. Sotto, and M. G. Kenward, “Every missingness not at
     random model has a missingness at random counterpart with equal fit,” Journal of the Royal
     Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 371–388, 2008.
[20] Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent neural networks for
     multivariate time series with missing values,” Scientific reports, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2018.
[21] R. T. Sousa, L. A. Pereira, and A. S. Soares, “Improving irregularly sampled time series learning
     with dense descriptors of time,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09291, 2020.
[22] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, A. Schuetz, W. F. Stewart, and J. Sun, “Doctor ai: Predicting clinical
     events via recurrent neural networks,” in Machine learning for healthcare conference, pp. 301–
     318, PMLR, 2016.
[23] R. Moskovitch, C. Walsh, F. Wang, G. Hripcsak, and N. Tatonetti, “Outcomes prediction
     via time intervals related patterns,” in 2015 IEEE international conference on data mining,
     pp. 919–924, IEEE, 2015.
[24] R. Pivovarov, D. J. Albers, J. L. Sepulveda, and N. Elhadad, “Identifying and mitigating biases
     in ehr laboratory tests,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 51, pp. 24–34, 2014.
[25] X. Cai, J. Gao, K. Y. Ngiam, B. C. Ooi, Y. Zhang, and X. Yuan, “Medical concept embedding
     with time-aware attention,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02873, 2018.
[26] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, J. Sun, J. Kulas, A. Schuetz, and W. Stewart, “Retain: An interpretable
     predictive model for healthcare using reverse time attention mechanism,” in Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems, pp. 3504–3512, 2016.
[27] Y. Zhang, “Attain: Attention-based time-aware lstm networks for disease progression modeling.,”
     in In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-
     2019), pp. 4369-4375, Macao, China., 2019.
[28] A. Gasparini, K. R. Abrams, J. K. Barrett, R. W. Major, M. J. Sweeting, N. J. Brunskill, and M. J.
     Crowther, “Mixed-effects models for health care longitudinal data with an informative visiting
     process: A monte carlo simulation study,” Statistica Neerlandica, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 5–23, 2020.
[29] L. Su, Q. Li, J. K. Barrett, and M. J. Daniels, “A sensitivity analysis approach for informative
     dropout using shared parameter models,” Biometrics, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 917–926, 2019.
[30] K. T. Islam, C. R. Shelton, J. I. Casse, and R. Wetzel, “Marked point process for severity of
     illness assessment,” in Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference, pp. 255–270, PMLR,
     2017.
[31] A. M. Alaa, S. Hu, and M. Schaar, “Learning from clinical judgments: Semi-markov-modulated
     marked hawkes processes for risk prognosis,” in International Conference on Machine Learning,
     pp. 60–69, PMLR, 2017.
[32] B. Twala, M. Jones, and D. J. Hand, “Good methods for coping with missing data in decision
     trees,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 950–956, 2008.
[33] P. B. Weerakody, K. W. Wong, G. Wang, and W. Ela, “A review of irregular time series data
     handling with gated recurrent neural networks,” Neurocomputing, 2021.
[34] I. M. Baytas, C. Xiao, X. Zhang, F. Wang, A. K. Jain, and J. Zhou, “Patient subtyping via
     time-aware lstm networks,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference
     on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 65–74, 2017.
[35] T. Pham, T. Tran, D. Phung, and S. Venkatesh, “Deepcare: A deep dynamic memory model
     for predictive medicine,” in Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining,
     pp. 30–41, Springer, 2016.
[36] M. C. Mozer, D. Kazakov, and R. V. Lindsey, “Discrete event, continuous time rnns,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1710.04110, 2017.


                                                 12
[37] L. L. Guo, S. R. Pfohl, J. Fries, A. E. Johnson, J. Posada, C. Aftandilian, N. Shah, and L. Sung,
     “Evaluation of domain generalization and adaptation on improving model robustness to temporal
     dataset shift in clinical medicine,” Scientific reports, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[38] D. Lazer, R. Kennedy, G. King, and A. Vespignani, “The parable of google flu: traps in big data
     analysis,” science, vol. 343, no. 6176, pp. 1203–1205, 2014.
[39] B. Nestor, M. B. McDermott, W. Boag, G. Berner, T. Naumann, M. C. Hughes, A. Goldenberg,
     and M. Ghassemi, “Feature robustness in non-stationary health records: caveats to deployable
     model performance in common clinical machine learning tasks,” in Machine Learning for
     Healthcare Conference, pp. 381–405, PMLR, 2019.
[40] H. Singh, V. Mhasawade, and R. Chunara, “Generalizability challenges of mortality risk
     prediction models: A retrospective analysis on a multi-center database,” PLOS Digital Health,
     vol. 1, no. 4, p. e0000023, 2022.
[41] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under concept drift: A review,”
     IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 2346–2363, 2018.
[42] Z. Lipton, Y.-X. Wang, and A. Smola, “Detecting and correcting for label shift with black box
     predictors,” in International conference on machine learning, pp. 3122–3130, PMLR, 2018.
[43] A. Rajkomar, E. Oren, K. Chen, A. M. Dai, N. Hajaj, M. Hardt, P. J. Liu, X. Liu, J. Marcus,
     M. Sun, et al., “Scalable and accurate deep learning with electronic health records,” NPJ Digital
     Medicine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2018.
[44] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural computation, vol. 9,
     no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[45] S. Xiao, J. Yan, X. Yang, H. Zha, and S. Chu, “Modeling the intensity function of point process
     via recurrent neural networks,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
     vol. 31, 2017.
[46] T. Gong, T. Lee, C. Stephenson, V. Renduchintala, S. Padhy, A. Ndirango, G. Keskin, and
     O. H. Elibol, “A comparison of loss weighting strategies for multi task learning in deep neural
     networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 141627–141632, 2019.
[47] S. Liu, E. Johns, and A. J. Davison, “End-to-end multi-task learning with attention,” in Proceed-
     ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1871–1880,
     2019.
[48] D. Schoenfeld, “Survival methods, including those using competing risk analysis, are not
     appropriate for intensive care unit outcome studies,” Critical Care, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1–2, 2005.
[49] S. Wang, M. B. McDermott, G. Chauhan, M. Ghassemi, M. C. Hughes, and T. Naumann,
     “Mimic-extract: A data extraction, preprocessing, and representation pipeline for mimic-iii,” in
     Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pp. 222–235, 2020.
[50] M. J. Zaki, S. Parthasarathy, M. Ogihara, and W. Li, “Parallel algorithms for discovery of
     association rules,” Data mining and knowledge discovery, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 343–373, 1997.
[51] H. Hung and C.-T. Chiang, “Estimation methods for time-dependent auc models with survival
     data,” Canadian Journal of Statistics, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 8–26, 2010.
[52] E. Graf, C. Schmoor, W. Sauerbrei, and M. Schumacher, “Assessment and comparison of
     prognostic classification schemes for survival data,” Statistics in medicine, vol. 18, no. 17-18,
     pp. 2529–2545, 1999.
[53] L. A. Pauls, R. Johnson-Paben, J. McGready, J. D. Murphy, P. J. Pronovost, and C. L. Wu, “The
     weekend effect in hospitalized patients: a meta-analysis.,” Journal of hospital medicine, vol. 12,
     no. 9, pp. 760–766, 2017.
[54] S. Sagawa, P. W. Koh, T. B. Hashimoto, and P. Liang, “Distributionally robust neural networks,”
     in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[55] S. Ruder, “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks,” arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1706.05098, 2017.




                                                  13
Checklist
    1. For all authors...
        (a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
            contributions and scope? [Yes] See Section 5.
        (b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] See Section 6.
        (c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [Yes] See last
            paragraph of Section 6 on the risk of reinforcing error.
        (d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
            them? [Yes]
    2. If you ran experiments...
        (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
            mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] Code will be
            released upon acceptance of the manuscript and have been shared as a supplemental
            material.
        (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
            were chosen)? [Yes] See Section 4 and Appendix A.1.
        (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
            ments multiple times)? [Yes] Bootstrapped confidence intervals are reported.
        (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
            of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] See Appendix A.1.
    3. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
        (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes] All models and data
            source were cited in Section 4.
        (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [No] References are included to access
            license details.
        (c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [Yes]
            All code is publicly available under a MIT licence.
        (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
            using/curating? [No] All data and code used were publicly available and received prior
            IRB approval.
        (e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable
            information or offensive content? [Yes] All data were anonymized as mentioned in
            Section 4.




                                                14
A      Appendix
A.1     Experiments

A.1.1      Data characteristics
Table 1 presents the demographic characteristics of the studied population and 2 summarises the set
of tests selected with the mean number of tests performed during the 24 hours post admission and
their mean values.

       Table 1: Population characteristics between patient admitted on weekdays and weekends.

                                                                         Population
                                                            Overall       Weekday        Weekend
                                 Number of patients         30,834         23,359          7,475
                                                  ∗
                          Length of stay (in days )     10.05 (10.49)   10.05 (10.60)   10.03 (10.15)
                                         Overall (%)        13.86          13.50           15.00
        Outcome                          1 day+ (%)          1.15          1.13             1.20
                           Death
                                        7 days+ (%)          7.05          6.79             7.88
                                       14 days+ (%)         10.33          9.94            11.52
                                          Male (%)          56.43          56.38           56.62
                          Gender
                                        Female (%)          43.57          43.62           43.38
                                         White (%)          71.84          72.52           69.74
                                          Other (%)         14.52          14.03           16.04
    Demographics         Ethnicity        Black (%)          7.88           7.87            7.92
                                       Hispanic (%)          3.32           3.19            3.73
                                          Asian (%)          2.43           2.39            2.57
                                         Public (%)         66.15          65.68           67.59
                         Insurance      Private (%)         32.65          33.31           30.58
                                       Self Pay (%)         1.21           1.01             1.82
  ∗
      Mean (std)
  +
      After first day of observation




                                                       15
                  Table 2: List of laboratory tests used with associated mean number
                  of tests and values (and standard deviations).

                                Laboratory test      Number of tests         Value
                                 Anion gap               1.84 (1.00)     13.87 (3.23)
                               Bicarbonate               1.88 (1.00)      24.15 (4.34)
                        Blood urea nitrogen              1.90 (1.00)     24.91 (20.36)
                                  Chloride               1.92 (1.03)     105.09 (5.74)
                                 Creatinine              1.91 (1.00)       1.33 (1.38)
                                   Glucose               2.84 (2.59)    136.77 (49.89)
                                Hematocrit               2.89 (2.36)      32.89 (5.34)
                               Hemoglobin                2.39 (2.04)     11.09 (1.91)
                               Magnesium                 1.81 (0.97)       1.98 (0.37)
                                     MCH∗                1.76 (0.96)     30.29 (2.52)
                        MCH concentration                1.76 (0.96)      33.82 (1.52)
                   Mean corpuscular volume               1.76 (0.96)      89.63 (6.65)
                                   Platelets             1.88 (1.10)    224.07 (109.73)
                                 Potassium               2.01 (1.08)       4.13 (0.55)
                       Red blood cell count              1.87 (1.02)      5.23 (15.24)
                                   Sodium                1.93 (1.08)     138.89 (4.38)
                     White blood cell count              1.88 (1.03)     11.83 (13.08)
                  ∗
                      Mean corpuscular hemoglobin.


A.1.2   Hyperparameters tuning
All models’ hyper-parameters were selected over the following grid of hyperparameters (if appropri-
ate) following 100 iterations of random search. All experiments were ran on a A100 GPU over 100
hours for each experiment.

                                Table 3: Grid for hyperparameters search

                                  Hyperparameter          Values
                                      Learning rate       10−3 , 10−4
                                        Batch size        100, 250
                 Training
                                                 α        0.1, 0.5
                                                  θ       2∗
                                           Layers         1, 2, 3
                  RNN
                                     Hidden nodes         10, 30
                                                Layers    0, 1, 2, 3
                 Survival
                                                Nodes     50
                                      Longitudinal        Same parameters explored as survival
          Clinical Presence             Temporal          Same parameters explored as survival
                                          Missing         Same parameters explored as survival
         ∗
             Following the results from [47].




                                                         16
A.1.3     Results
Table 4 presents the discriminative results on the test set of the first set of experiment for which
patients are randomly assigned to train and test sets.

               Table 4: Time Dependent C-Index - Mean (95%-CI) – Higher is better.

                                                      Evaluation horizons
                                                (in days after last observation)
                            Models          1                  7               14
                             Last     0.851 (0.004)     0.734 (0.002)    0.691 (0.002)
                           Count      0.860 (0.004)     0.746 (0.002)    0.699 (0.002)
                           Ignore     0.853 (0.003)     0.740 (0.002)    0.697 (0.002)
                        Resample      0.844 (0.004)     0.739 (0.002)    0.695 (0.002)
                       DeepJoint      0.862 (0.003)     0.742 (0.002)    0.695 (0.002)
                          GRU-D       0.855 (0.004)     0.743 (0.002)    0.697 (0.002)
                          Feature     0.873 (0.003)     0.750 (0.002)    0.697 (0.002)
                DeepJointFeature      0.873 (0.003)     0.749 (0.002)    0.697 (0.002)
               DeepJointFineTune      0.878 (0.003)     0.751 (0.002)    0.700 (0.002)

Figure 6 and Table 5 present the Brier score obtained on a random split of patients, showing little
difference in the calibration of the different models.




        Figure 6: Robustness evaluation between patients admitted on weekdays and weekends.



               Table 5: Time dependent Brier score - Mean (95%-CI) – Lower is better.

                                                      Evaluation horizons
                                                (in days after last observation)
                            Models          1                  7               14
                             Last     0.011 (0.000)     0.079 (0.000)    0.148 (0.001)
                           Count      0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.147 (0.001)
                           Ignore     0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.147 (0.001)
                        Resample      0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.148 (0.001)
                       DeepJoint      0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.149 (0.001)
                          GRU-D       0.011 (0.000)     0.079 (0.000)    0.148 (0.001)
                          Feature     0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.149 (0.001)
                DeepJointFeature      0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.149 (0.001)
               DeepJointFineTune      0.011 (0.000)     0.078 (0.000)    0.150 (0.001)




                                                  17
A.1.4     Transfer performances
Figure 7 shows the performance on patients admitted on weekends. This echoes the conclusion made
in Section 5.2 that the proposed model is more robust to change in the clinical presence.




        Figure 7: Robustness evaluation between patients admitted on weekdays and weekends.

Table 6 (resp. 7) present the discriminative difference on the weekdays test set between the model
trained on weekdays-admissions and the model transferred from weekends to weekdays (resp. on
the weekends test set). In the context of weekdays performance, note that the proposed approach
DeepJoint is more robust than the Resample approach but presents similar results than the Ignore
model. Note that, for weekends evaluation, GRU-D presents state-of-the-art predictive performance
and robustness at short time horizons but presents a larger confidence intervals. Additionally, this
result didn’t generalise to the other evaluation horizons.
These results emphasise that the proposed joint modelling DeepJointFeature is more robust than
state-of-the-art approaches. Interestingly, ignoring the clinical process (Resample or Ignore) seems
to be less robust to a change in the observation process, echoing the remark made by [7] about the
difficulty of ignoring it. Finally, note how simple features such as in Count might be detrimental to
the model due to a covariate shift – particularly pronounced when applied to weekends admission.

Table 6: Difference between model trained on weekends and model trained on weekdays tested on
weekdays admission test set - Mean (95%-CI) – Lower absolute value is better.

                                                      Evaluation horizons
                                                (in days after last observation)
                           Models           1                  7                   14
                            Last      0.001 (0.004)     -0.010 (0.003)    -0.021 (0.002)
                          Count      -0.061 (0.006)     -0.036 (0.003)    -0.030 (0.003)
                          Ignore     -0.016 (0.007)     -0.021 (0.003)    -0.035 (0.003)
                       Resample      0.042 (0.005)      -0.006 (0.003)    -0.031 (0.003)
                      DeepJoint      -0.015 (0.006)     -0.025 (0.003)    -0.042 (0.003)
                         GRU-D       -0.015 (0.005)     -0.029 (0.003)    -0.033 (0.003)
                         Feature     -0.047 (0.006)     -0.033 (0.003)    -0.042 (0.003)
               DeepJointFeature       0.007 (0.006)      0.004 (0.003)    -0.021 (0.003)
              DeepJointFineTune      -0.019 (0.005)     -0.009 (0.004)    -0.035 (0.003)




                                                  18
Table 7: Difference between model trained on weekdays and model trained on weekends tested on
weekends admission test set - Mean (95%-CI) – Lower absolute value is better.

                                                  Evaluation horizons
                                            (in days after last observation)
                         Models         1                  7                   14
                          Last    -0.005 (0.009)    -0.007 (0.005)    0.007 (0.003)
                        Count      0.130 (0.023)    -0.001 (0.004)    0.015 (0.004)
                        Ignore    0.060 (0.029)     -0.006 (0.005)    0.016 (0.003)
                     Resample     0.058 (0.012)     0.005 (0.006)     0.046 (0.004)
                    DeepJoint      0.071 (0.011)     0.014 (0.005)    0.030 (0.003)
                       GRU-D       0.003 (0.010)     0.028 (0.004)    0.039 (0.004)
                       Feature     0.068 (0.013)     0.020 (0.004)    0.039 (0.003)
             DeepJointFeature     -0.004 (0.002)     0.010 (0.004)    0.034 (0.004)
            DeepJointFineTune      0.017 (0.003)     0.003 (0.004)    0.033 (0.004)




                                              19
